Manualslib.com - The Global Manuals Library
Manuals / Brands / BMW Manuals / Automobile / i3 / Owner's manual / PDF
BMW I3 OWNER'S MANUAL
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
Notes
basic information
for your own safety
parts and accessories
california proposition 65 warning
service and warranty
event data recorder edr
vehicle identification number
reporting safety defects

At a glance
At a glance Cockpit
Cockpit
iDrive
options menu
setting the clock
general information
Voice activation system
adjusting the volume
Integrated Owner's Manual in the vehicle
BMW eDRIVE
before driving
safety information
Safety of the high-voltage system
Controls
Opening and closing
replacing the battery
the concept
profile management
using the remote control
courtesy lights
unlocking and opening
Hood
alarm system
rear doors
from the inside
unlocking and locking
manual release
Tailgate
opening from the inside

automatic locking
Alarm system
power windows
interior motion sensor
switching off the alarm
Adjusting
front head restraints
rear head restraints
adjusting the height
steering wheel
Transporting children safely
child seat security
deactivating airbags
restraint systems
Driving
selector lever positions
driving off
while driving
hold function
Washer/wiper system
rear window wiper
windshield washer nozzles
Washer fluid
Displays
check control
coolant temperature
On-board computer
trip computer
Speed warning
Lights

instrument lighting
daytime running lights
interior lights
reading lights
ambient light
Safety
knee airbag
deactivation system
tire pressure monitor tpm
functional limitations
Driving stability control systems
Driving comfort
cruise control
pdc park distance control
indicator lamp
rearview camera
display settings
system status
Climate control
automatic climate control
rear window defroster
maximum cooling
Interior equipment
digital compass
sun visor
vanity mirror
cargo area
cargo cover
Storage compartments
front cup holder

storage compartment
clothes hooks
rear seat
Driving tips
Things to remember when driving
general driving notes
closing the tailgate
Loading
securing cargo
stowing cargo
Increase range
Mobility
Charging vehicle
vehicle battery
Refueling
Fuel
Wheels and tires
tire identification marks
tire size
tire identification number
tire age
uniform tire quality grading
dot quality grades
tire tread
summer tires
winter tires
tire damage
changing wheels and tires
wheel and tire combination
new tires
distributing the sealant
snow chains

Under the hood
closing the hood
opening hood
Engine oil
Coolant
Maintenance
Replacing components
low beams
battery replacement
changing wheels
Fuses
replacing fuse
Breakdown assistance
Intelligent Emergency Request
first aid kit
Jump-starting
Towing
warning triangle
Care
selector lever position
vehicle care
safety belts
Reference
Technical data
Appendix
Everything from A to Z
Other ManualsLib Projects

Contents
A-Z
THE BMW i3.
OWNER'S MANUAL.
BMW i.
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

BMW i SUSTAINABILITY.
AUTOMOBILITY.
REINVENTED.
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine
BMW_i3_Bedienungseinleger_210x138mm_us_lektoriert_RZ.indd 1 22.01.14 15:19

THE SUSTAINABLE PRODUCT
LIFE CYCLE OF BMW i.
01. DEVELOPMENT
  Redefine design principles for
purpose-built e-mobility.
  Reshape aerodynamics for less drag.
  Replace traditional materials with
recycled and renewable materials.
04. RECYCLING
  Retain used batteries as temporary
storage units, e.g. for solar energy.
  Recycle carbon fi bers by returning
them to the production process.
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine
BMW_i3_Bedienungseinleger_210x138mm_us_lektoriert_RZ.indd 2 22.01.14 15:19

03. UTILIZATION
  Recharge battery with innovative
BMW eDrive technology.
  Receive power from clean energy
producers for zero emission driving.
  Reduce CO emissions by 50%

throughout the product life cycle
by using energy from renewable
sources.
02. PRODUCTION
  Use clean electric power for
BMW i plants.
  Reduce energy consumption
in BMW i production.
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine
BMW_i3_Bedienungseinleger_210x138mm_us_lektoriert_RZ.indd 3 22.01.14 15:19

01. DEVELOPMENT
FOR OVER THREE QUARTERS OF
A CENTURY, THE BASIC IDEA BEHIND
THE CAR WAS LEFT UNTOUCHED.
Until now. Today, the BMW i3 introduces a wealth of new ways to create
the ultimate sustainable electric car. One key innovation is LifeDrive:
the first serial production passenger cell made of light and extremely
robust carbon fiber. It substantially reduces the weight of the vehicle
for maximum electric range. Moreover, streamflow aerodynamics
reduce drag and energy consumption.
The interior of the BMW i3 features natural-fiber based raw materials
in the instrument panel and door trim surfaces. Textiles for the seats
are made of up to 100% recycled materials. The leather components
are tanned with natural olive leaf extract, which gives the leather a
unique, fresh scent. The interior wood panels are made of open-pore
eucalyptus wood. All wood is sourced from responsible forestry and
certified by the Forest Stewardship Council  (FSC ).
Innovation is also built into the BMW i3 product development process
itself: To ensure a truly sustainable product, measurable targets were
already set in the early strategic phase of development to define environmental guidelines for the entire product life cycle - from the sourcing
of raw materials to production, utilization and recycling. These were
agreed to and monitored throughout the development phase of the
vehicle. The life cycle assessment process and the results have been
certified by a third party according to ISO 14040/14044. Further
details can be found online at bmw-i.com.
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine
BMW_i3_Bedienungseinleger_210x138mm_us_lektoriert_RZ.indd 4 22.01.14 15:19

The Life module
is made of ultra-light
carbon fi ber.
%

lighter than aluminum.
%

lighter than steel.
The interior of the BMW i3 includes a variety
of premium-quality, sustainable materials.
Approximately 25% of the thermoplastics used
are composed of recyclates or have been
replaced by renewable materials.
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine
BMW_i3_Bedienungseinleger_210x138mm_us_lektoriert_RZ.indd 5 22.01.14 15:19

02. PRODUCTION
THE BMW i3: FORGED BY THE POWER
OF WIND AND WATER.
The BMW i3 not only produces zero emissions while driving; all
electricity that goes into its production in Leipzig is generated from
renewables. BMW factories have been leading the way in sustainable
production for a long time now, but BMW i has gone even further
and significantly improved its facilities. The BMW i factory in Leipzig
produces its own renewable energy - right on the premises - and
operates on 100% clean electric power at zero emissions. It also
consumes significantly less resources.
And consider the unique approach to carbon fiber production: It has
been located in Moses Lake, USA, so that all operations can be
powered completely by renewable energy from the numerous hydroelectric plants nearby.
For BMW i, sustainable production is not only an environmental consideration but also a social one, creating future-proof job profiles and
training BMW i's suppliers to comply with advanced sustainability
standards.
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine
BMW_i3_Bedienungseinleger_210x138mm_us_lektoriert_RZ.indd 6 22.01.14 15:19

%

renewable energy
%
-50
energy input
%
-70
water consumption
Energy and resource
consumption per
* compared to the industryBMW i3 produced* leading BMW average
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine
BMW_i3_Bedienungseinleger_210x138mm_us_lektoriert_RZ.indd 7 22.01.14 15:19

03. UTILIZATION
THE ORIGIN OF EMISSION-FREE
DRIVING: POWER FROM RENEWABLE
RESOURCES.
With zero local emissions while driving, the BMW i3 helps reduce air
pollution in urban areas. When charged with clean power - generated
from renewables - the positive impact is greater still. This is because,
throughout the entire product life cycle, driving the new BMW i3 on
energy from renewable sources can potentially reduce emissions (CO

equivalents) by up to 50%, when compared to a highly efficient vehicle
of the same class with a combustion engine. That's why BMW i recommends clean energy producers, to help make an even bigger difference. Further details can be found online at bmw-i.com/sustainability.
As if that weren't enough, the innovative eDrive technology of the
BMW i3 also features all sorts of efficiency enhancers: from state-ofthe-art brake energy recuperation to range-increasing ECO PRO+
driving mode, which can boost the driving range by up to 40km at the
touch of a button.
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine
BMW_i3_Bedienungseinleger_210x138mm_us_lektoriert_RZ.indd 8 22.01.14 15:19

In terms of its performance throughout the entire
product life cycle - from the sourcing of raw
materials to production, use and recycling - how
does the BMW i3 compare to a vehicle with a
high-effi ciency combustion engine?
%

fewer CO equivalents

when driving on electricity from renewable
sources.
%

fewer CO equivalents

when driving with
EU-25 or comparable
energy mixes.
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine
BMW_i3_Bedienungseinleger_210x138mm_us_lektoriert_RZ.indd 9 22.01.14 15:19

04. RECYCLING
AT BMW i WE NOT ONLY PIONEER
NEW MATERIALS, WE ALSO TAKE
CARE OF THEIR RECYCLING.
Recycling is a given at BMW i. Production residues from carbon fiber
production, carbon components and body parts, for instance, are
valuable materials. That's why they are either reused as secondary raw
materials for the in-house BMW i production cycle or recycled for other
automotive or non-automotive applications. And the early production
stage of a BMW i3 marks a first for the automotive industry - the first
time recycled carbon fiber is being used for a vehicle passenger cell.
Together with partners, BMW i is pioneering closed loops for up to
100% of carbon fiber from production residues or end-of-life vehicles.
BMW i is also branching out in new directions when it comes to the
recycling of other components and materials. For example, there are
many possible ways to reuse the high-capacity BMW i lithium ion
battery pack. A very simple and effective one is as temporary energy
storage for solar power or wind energy to make renewably produced
energy available when it is needed.
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine
BMW_i3_Bedienungseinleger_210x138mm_us_lektoriert_RZ.indd 10 22.01.14 15:19

%

of used battery
packs could, for example, be reused as
temporary storage
units for solar power
equipment and wind
energy systems.
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine
BMW_i3_Bedienungseinleger_210x138mm_us_lektoriert_RZ.indd 11 22.01.14 15:19

To fi nd out more about the sustainability
philosophy behind your BMW i, please visit:
bmw-i.com/sustainability
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine
BMW_i3_Bedienungseinleger_210x138mm_us_lektoriert_RZ.indd 12 22.01.14 15:19

i3 Owner's Manual for Vehicle
Thank you for choosing a BMW i.
The more familiar you are with your vehicle, the better control
you will have on the road. We therefore strongly suggest:
Read this Owner's Handbook before starting off in your new
BMW i. Also use the Integrated Owner's Manual in your vehicle.
It contains important information on vehicle operation that will
help you make full use of the technical features available in your
BMW i. The manual also contains information designed to en 
hance operating reliability and road safety, and to contribute to
maintaining the value of your BMW i.
Any updates made after the editorial deadline can be found in
the appendix of the Owner's Handbook for Vehicle.
We wish you a safe and enjoyable ride.
BMW AG
The Owner's Manual is available in many countries as an app.
Additional information on the Internet:
www.bmw.com/bmw_i_drivers_guide
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

  2015 Bayerische Motoren Werke
Aktiengesellschaft
Munich, Germany
Reprinting, including excerpts, only with the written
consent of BMW AG, Munich.
US English II/15, 03 15 490
Printed on environmentally friendly paper, bleached
without chlorine, suitable for recycling.
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Addendum
ADDENDUM TO OWNER'S MANUAL
We wanted to provide you with some updates we recommend that you make sure that any
and clarifications with respect to the printed such parts and/or accessories are appropriBMW Owner's Manual. These updates and ate for use on your vehicle.
clarifications will supersede the materials con4. At page 7, under the warranty section's distained in that document.
cussion of homologation, where it states
1. Where the terms "service center," "the ser- that you "cannot lodge warranty claims for
vice center," "your service center," "service your vehicle there," the text should read
specialist," or "service" are used in the that you "may not be able to lodge warranty
Owner's Manual, we wanted to clarify that claims for your vehicle there."
the terms refer to a BMW dealer's service
5. At page 7, under the heading "Body work
center or another service center or repair
and working on the high-voltage system,"
shop that employs trained personnel that
the text of that section should be disrecan perform maintenance and repair work
garded and the following text should be
on your vehicle in accordance with BMW
read in lieu thereof: "BMW recommends to
specifications.
have modifications and work on the vehicle
2. Where the text of the Owner's Manual con- only be carried out by an authorized BMW i
tains an affirmative instruction to contact a service center or one that operates accord-
"service center" or "your service center," ing to BMW i specifications with personnel
we wanted to clarify that BMW recom- trained accordingly. If work is not carried out
mends that, if you are faced with one of the properly, there is the risk of fire and fatal
situations addressed by that text, you con- injury from electrocution due to the hightact or seek the assistance of a BMW voltage system's high voltage."
dealer's service center or another service
6. At page 8, under the "Parts and Accessocenter or repair shop that employs trained
ries" section, in the sixth sentence, the
personnel that can perform maintenance
word "cannot" should read "does not."
and repair work on your vehicle in accor7. At page 55, in the "Check and replace
dance with BMW specifications.
safety belts" section, the text beginning,
While BMW of North America LLC, at no
"This should only be done by your service
cost to you, will pay for repairs required by
center  " should be disregarded and the
the limited warranties provided with respect
following text should be read in lieu thereof:
to your vehicle and for maintenance under
"BMW recommends having this work perthe Maintenance Program during the appliformed by a service center as it is important
cable warranty and maintenance coverage
that this safety feature functions properly."
periods, you are free to elect, both during
8. At page 150 under the heading: "Objects
those periods and thereafter, to have mainwithin the range of movement of the pedtenance and repair work provided by other
als" and at page 203 under the heading:
service centers or repair shops.
"Carpets and floor mats," the paragraph
3. Where the Owner's Manual makes referthat begins: "Only use floor mats  " should
ence to parts and accessories having been
be disregarded and the following language
approved by BMW, those references are
should be read in lieu thereof: "The manuintended to reflect that those parts and
facturer of your vehicle recommends that
accessories are recommended by BMW of
you use floor mats that have been identified
North America LLC. You may elect to use
other parts and accessories, but, if you do,
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Addendum
by it as appropriate for use in your vehicle tires to determine if they are suitable for use
and that can be properly fixed in place." on your vehicle.
9. At page 155, under the heading: "Have 14. At page 181, under the heading: "Snow
maintenance carried out," the sentence Chains," the text should be disregarded and
beginning, "The maintenance should be the following text should be read in lieu
carried out  " should be disregarded and thereof:
the following text should be read in lieu
Only certain types of fine-link snow chains
thereof: "BMW recommends that you have
have been tested by the manufacturer of
the maintenance carried out by your service
your vehicle and are determined by the
center."
manufacturer of your vehicle to be road safe
10. At page 161, under the heading "Make sure and are recommended by the manufacturer
that the charging device is in flawless oper- of your vehicle.
ating condition," the word "flawless" should
Information about recommended snow
read "proper."
chains is available from a service center.
11. At page 173, under the heading "Tire infla15. At page 182, under the heading "Hood," the
tion specifications," the sentence beginsentence beginning, "If you are unfamiliar"
ning, "Tire inflation pressure specifications
should be disregarded.
apply to approved tire sizes   ." should be
16. At page 185, under the heading: "Adding or
disregarded.
changing engine oil," the text should be dis12. At page 176, under the heading: "Mountregarded and in lieu thereof should be read
ing," the paragraph beginning, "Have
as follows:
mounting and balancing  " should be disIf necessary, BMW recommends that you
regarded and the following text should be
have oil added changed at your BMW
read in lieu thereof: "BMW recommends
dealer's service center or at another service
that you have mounting and balancing percenter that has trained personnel that can
formed by your service center or a tire
perform the work in accordance with BMW
mounting specialist."
specifications.
13. At page 177, under the heading: "Approved
17. At page 189, under the heading: "Service
wheels and tires," the term "Approved"
and Warranty Information Booklet for US
should be disregarded and in lieu thereof,
models and Warranty and Service Guide
the term "Recommended" should be read
Booklet for Canadian models," the second
in its place. In addition, the text of that secparagraph should be disregarded and the
tion should be disregarded and the followfollowing text read in lieu thereof:
ing text should be read in lieu thereof:
The manufacturer of your vehicle recomThe manufacturer of your vehicle strongly
mends that you have maintenance and
suggests that you use wheels and tires that
repair performed by your BMW dealer's serhave been recommended by the vehicle
vice center or another service center or
manufacturer for your vehicle type; otherrepair shop that employs trained personnel
wise, for example, despite having the same
that can perform maintenance and repair
official size ratings, variations can lead to
work on your vehicle in accordance with
body contact and with it, the risk of severe
BMW specifications. The manufacturer of
accidents.
your vehicle recommends that you maintain
The manufacturer of your vehicle does not
records of all maintenance and repair work
evaluate non-recommended wheels and
performed on your vehicle.
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Addendum
18. At page 194, under the "Battery replacement" section, the text should be disregarded and in lieu thereof the following text
should be read:
Use of recommended vehicle batteries
The manufacturer of your vehicle recommends that you use vehicle batteries that it
has tested and recommends for use in your
vehicle; otherwise the vehicle could be
damaged and systems or functions may not
be fully available.
After a battery replacement, the manufacturer of your vehicle recommends that you
have the battery registered on your vehicle
by a service center to ensure that all comfort functions are fully available, and that
any "check control" messages of these
comfort functions are no longer displayed.
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Contents
The fastest way to find information on a partic  Mobility
ular topic or item is by using the index, refer to 160 Charging vehicle
page 210.
169 Refueling
172 Fuel
173 Wheels and tires
6 Notes
182 Under the hood
184 Engine oil
At a glance
186 Coolant
14 Cockpit
188 Maintenance
18 iDrive
190 Replacing components
26 Voice activation system
196 Breakdown assistance
29 Integrated Owner's Manual in the vehicle
200 Care
31 BMW eDRIVE
34 Safety of the high-voltage system
Reference
206 Technical data
Controls
208 Appendix
38 Opening and closing
210 Everything from A to Z
53 Adjusting
60 Transporting children safely
64 Driving
75 Displays
90 Lights
93 Safety
107 Driving stability control systems
110 Driving comfort
128 Climate control
135 Interior equipment
143 Storage compartments
Driving tips
148 Things to remember when driving
152 Loading
154 Increase range
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 6
Notes
Notes
Using this Owner's Manual Symbols
Indicates precautions that must be followed
Orientation
precisely in order to avoid the possibility of
The fastest way to find information on a partic 
personal injury and serious damage to the
ular topic is by using the index.
vehicle.
An initial overview of the vehicle is provided in
  Marks the end of a specific item of
the first chapter.
information.
Refers to measures that can be taken to
Updates made after the editorial
help protect the environment.
deadline
"..." Identifies display texts in vehicle used to
Any updates made after the editorial deadline
select individual functions.
can be found in the appendix of the printed
Owner's Handbook for Vehicle.  ...  Verbal instructions to use with the voice
activation system.
User's manual for Navigation,   ...   Identifies the answers generated by the
Entertainment, Communication voice activation system.
The topics Navigation, Entertainment, Com 
Symbols on vehicle components
munication and the short commands of the
voice activation system can be retrieved on the Indicates that you should consult the
Control Display via the Integrated Owner's relevant section of this Owner's Manual for
Handbook. information on a particular part or assembly.
Additional sources of
information
The service center will be happy to answer any
other questions you may have.
Information on BMW, e.g., on technology, is
available on the Internet: www.bmwusa.com.
Indicates, on certain parts or assemblies, that
BMW i Driver's Guide App
incorrect use of high-voltage equipment or of
orange-colored high-voltage components re 
The Owner's Manual is available in many coun  sults in the risk of life-threatening injury from
tries as an app. Additional information on the electric shock.
Internet:
www.bmw.com/bmw_i_drivers_guide
Vehicle features and options
This Owner's Manual describes all models and
all standard, country-specific and optional

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 7
Notes
equipment that is offered in the model series. ating conditions and permit requirements. If
Therefore, in this Owner's Manual, we also de  your vehicle does not comply with the homolo 
scribe and illustrate features that are not avail  gation requirements in a certain country you
able in your vehicle, e.g., because of the se  cannot lodge warranty claims for your vehicle
lected optional features or the country-specific there. Further information can be obtained
version. from your Service Centre.
This also applies to safety-related functions
Working on the vehicle, maintenance
and systems.
and repairs
The respectively applicable country provisions
Advanced technology, especially the use of
must be observed when using the respective
high-performance high-voltage electronics
features and systems.
and modern materials such as carbon, requires
On right-hand drive vehicles, some controls
special knowledge when making modifications
are arranged differently from what is shown in
to and working on the vehicle, as well as cus 
the illustrations.
tomized maintenance and repair work.
BMW recommends to have modifications and
Status of the Owner's work on the vehicle, especially maintenance
and repairs to the high-voltage system and
Manual
carbon body as well as the retrofitting of ac 
cessories only be carried out by an authorized
Basic information
BMW i service center or one that operates ac 
The manufacturer of your vehicle pursues a cording to BMW i specifications with personnel
policy of constant development that is con  trained accordingly.
ceived to ensure that our vehicles continue to
Body work and working on the high-volt 
embody the highest quality and safety stan 
age system
dards. In rare cases, therefore, the features de 
scribed in this Owner's Manual may differ from Do not perform any modifications or work on
those in your vehicle. the vehicle, especially maintenance and repair
work on the high-voltage system and the car 
Updates made after the editorial bon body and avoid retrofitting accessories.
deadline If work is not carried out properly, there is the
Any updates made after the editorial deadline risk of fire and fatal injury from electrocution
can be found in the appendix of the printed due to the high-voltage system's high voltage.
Owner's Handbook for Vehicle. BMW recommends to have modifications and
work on the vehicle only be carried out by an
authorized BMW i service center or one that
For your own safety
operates according to BMW i specifications
with personnel trained accordingly. 
Warranty
Your vehicle is technically configured for the Parts and accessories
operating conditions and registration require 
BMW recommends using parts and accesso 
ments applying in the country of first delivery -
ries approved by BMW for this purpose.
homologation. If your vehicle is to be operated
Your BMW center is the right contact for genu 
in a different country it might be necessary to
ine BMW parts and accessories, other prod 
adapt your vehicle to potentially differing oper 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 8
Notes
ucts approved by BMW and related qualified   New Vehicle Limited Warranty.
advice.
  Rust Perforation Limited Warranty.
BMW has tested these products for safety and
  Federal Emissions System Defect War 
suitability in relation to BMW vehicles.
ranty.
BMW can assume responsibility for them.
  Federal Emissions Performance Warranty.
However, we cannot assume any responsibility
  California Emission Control System Lim 
whatsoever for parts and accessories that have
ited Warranty.
not been specifically approved by BMW.
Detailed information about these warranties is
BMW cannot evaluate whether each individual
listed in the Service and Warranty Information
product from another manufacturer can be
Booklet for US models or in the Warranty and
used with BMW vehicles without presenting a
Service Guide Booklet for Canadian models.
safety hazard. This guarantee does not apply
when country-specific government approval Your vehicle has been specifically adapted and
has been granted. Testing of this kind may fail designed to meet the particular operating con 
to embrace the entire range of potential oper  ditions and homologation requirements in your
ating conditions to which components might country and continental region in order to de 
be exposed on BMW vehicles. Such products liver the full driving pleasure while the vehicle
could conceivably fail to comply with BMW's is operated under those conditions. If you wish
own stringent quality standards. to operate your vehicle in another country or
region, you may be required to adapt your ve 
California Proposition 65 Warning hicle to meet different prevailing operating
conditions and homologation requirements.
California laws require us to state the following
You should also be aware of any applicable
warning:
warranty limitations or exclusions for such
Engine exhaust and a wide variety of automo 
country or region. In such case, please contact
bile components and parts, including compo 
Customer Relations for further information.
nents found in the interior furnishings in a vehi 
cle, contain or emit chemicals known to the
Maintenance
State of California to cause cancer and birth
Maintain the vehicle regularly to sustain the
defects and reproductive harm. In addition,
road safety, operational reliability and the New
certain fluids contained in vehicles and certain
Vehicle Limited Warranty.
products of component wear contain or emit
chemicals known to the State of California to Specifications for required maintenance meas 
cause cancer and birth defects or other repro  ures:
ductive harm. Battery posts, terminals and re    BMW Maintenance system
lated accessories contain lead and lead com 
  Service and Warranty Information Booklet
pounds. Wash your hands after handling. Used
for US models
engine oil contains chemicals that have caused
  Warranty and Service Guide Booklet for
cancer in laboratory animals. Always protect
Canadian models
your skin by washing thoroughly with soap and
water. If the vehicle is not maintained according to
these specifications, this could result in seri 
Service and warranty ous damage to the vehicle. Such damage is
not covered by the BMW New Vehicle Limited
We recommend that you read this publication
Warranty.
thoroughly. Your vehicle is covered by the fol 
lowing warranties:

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 9
Notes
Data memory emergency locating - you can transmit certain
vehicle data from the vehicle.
Many electronic components on your vehicle
are equipped with data memories that tempo 
rarily or permanently store technical informa  Event Data Recorder EDR
tion about the condition of the vehicle, events
and faults. This technical information generally This vehicle is equipped with an event data re 
records the state of a component, a module, a corder EDR. The main purpose of an EDR is to
system or the environment: record, in certain crash or near crash-like situa 
tions, such as an air bag deployment or hitting
  Operating mode of system components, fill
a road obstacle, data that will assist in under 
levels for instance.
standing how a vehicle's systems performed.
  Status messages for the vehicle and from
The EDR is designed to record data related to
its individual components, e.g., wheel rota 
vehicle dynamics and safety systems for a
tion speed/vehicle speed, deceleration,
short period of time, typically 30 seconds or
transverse acceleration.
less.
  Malfunctions and faults in important sys 
The EDR in this vehicle is designed to record
tem components, e.g., lights and brakes.
such data as:
  Responses by the vehicle to special situa 
  How various systems in your vehicle were
tions such as airbag deployment or engag 
operating.
ing the stability control system.
  Whether or not the driver and passenger
  Ambient conditions, such as temperature.
safety belts were fastened.
This data is purely technical in nature and is
  How far, if at all, the driver was depressing
used to detect and correct faults and to opti 
the accelerator and/or brake pedal.
mize vehicle functions. Motion profiles over
  How fast the vehicle was traveling.
routes traveled cannot be created from this
data. When service offerings are used, e.g., re  These data can help provide a better under 
pair services, service processes, warranty standing of the circumstances in which
claims, quality assurance, this technical infor  crashes and injuries occur.
mation can be read out from the event and EDR data are recorded by your vehicle only if a
fault memories by the service personnel, in  nontrivial crash situation occurs; no data are
cluding the manufacturer, using special diag  recorded by the EDR under normal driving
nostic tools. You can obtain further information conditions and no personal data, e.g., name,
there if you need it. After an error is corrected, gender, age, and crash location, are recorded.
the information in the fault memory is deleted
However, other parties, such as law enforce 
or overwritten on a continuous basis.
ment, could combine the EDR data with the
With the vehicle in use there are situations type of personally identifying data routinely ac 
where you can associate these technical data quired during a crash investigation.
with individuals if combined with other infor 
To read data recorded by an EDR, special
mation, e.g., an accident report, damage to the
equipment is required, and access to the vehi 
vehicle, eye witness accounts -- possibly with
cle or the EDR is needed. In addition to the ve 
the assistance of an expert.
hicle manufacturer, other parties, such as law
Additional functions that are contractually enforcement, that have the special equipment,
agreed with the customer - such as vehicle can read the information if they have access to
the vehicle or the EDR.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 10
Notes
Vehicle identification formation about motor vehicle safety from
number http://www.safercar.gov.
For Canadian customers
Canadian customers who wish to report a
safety-related defect to Transport Canada, De 
fect Investigations and Recalls, may call the
toll-free hotline 1-800-333-0510. You can also
obtain other information about motor vehicle
safety from http://www.tc.gc.ca/roadsafety.
The vehicle identification number can be found
under a cover under the front passenger seat.
The vehicle identification number can also be
found behind the windshield.
Reporting safety defects
For US customers
The following only applies to vehicles owned
and operated in the US.
If you believe that your vehicle has a defect
which could cause a crash or could cause in 
jury or death, you should immediately inform
the National Highway Traffic Safety Adminis 
tration NHTSA, in addition to notifying BMW of
North America, LLC, P.O. Box 1227, West 
wood, New Jersey 07675-1227, Telephone
1-800-831-1117.
If NHTSA receives similar complaints, it may
open an investigation, and if it finds that a
safety defect exists in a group of vehicles, it
may order a recall and remedy campaign.
However, NHTSA cannot become involved in
individual problems between you, your dealer,
or BMW of North America, LLC.
To contact NHTSA, you may call the Vehicle
Safety Hotline toll-free at 1-888-327-4236
(TTY: 1-800-424-9153); go to http://
www.safercar.gov; or write to: Administrator,
NHTSA, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washing 
ton, DC 20590. You can also obtain other in 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 11
Notes

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

At a glance
These overviews of buttons, switches and
displays are intended to familiarize you with your
vehicle. You will also become quickly acquainted
with the available control concepts and options.
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 14
At a glance Cockpit
Cockpit
Vehicle features and options the selected options or country versions. This
also applies to safety-related functions and
This chapter describes all standard, countrysystems. The respectively applicable country
specific and optional features offered with the
provisions must be observed when using the
series. It also describes features that are not
respective features and systems.
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
All around the steering wheel
1 Power windows 50 Automatic headlight con 
trol 91
2 Exterior mirror operation 57
Daytime running lights 91
3 Unlocking hood 44
Instrument lighting 91
Unlock tailgate 45
With Range Extender: vent fuel tank 169
4 Lights 5 Left steering column stalk
Parking lights 90 Turn signal 71
Low beams 90 High beams, head 
light flasher 71

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 15
Cockpit At a glance
Roadside parking lights 91 Voice activation 26
On-board computer 86 Telephone
Thumbwheel for selection lists 85
6 Instrument cluster 75
7 Switch drive readiness on and 11 Adjust steering wheel 59
off 64
12 Steering wheel buttons, left
Store speed 116
8 Selector lever 66
9 Right steering column stalk
Resume speed 118
Wiper 72
Cruise control on/off, interrupt 
Rain sensor 73
ing 117
Active Cruise Control on/off, in 
Clean the windshields and head 
terrupting 110
lights 73
Cruise control, adjust dis 
Rear window wiper in Canadian
tance 110
models 73
Cruise control rocker switch 117
Rear window wiper 73
13 Horn, total area
Cleaning rear window 74
10 Steering wheel buttons, right
Entertainment source
Volume

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 16
At a glance Cockpit
All around the center console
1 Control Display 18 6 Controller with buttons 18
2 Radio/Multimedia, refer to Integrated Own  7 Parking brake 70
er's Handbook
8 PDC Park Distance Control 118
3 Glove compartment 143
Rearview camera 121
4 Climate control 128
Parking assistant 123
5 Hazard warning system 196
9 Driving Dynamics Control 108
Intelligent Safety 100

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 17
Cockpit At a glance
All around the roofliner
1 Intelligent Emergency Re  4 Reading lights 91
quest 196
2 Glass sunroof, powered 51 5 Interior lights 91
3 Indicator lamp, front-seat pas 
senger airbag 95

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 18
At a glance iDrive
iDrive
Vehicle features and options Control Display
This chapter describes all standard, country- Hints
specific and optional features offered with the
  To clean the Control Display, follow the
series. It also describes features that are not
care instructions.
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
  Do not place objects close to the Control
the selected options or country versions. This
Display; otherwise, the Control Display or
also applies to safety-related functions and
other surfaces can be damaged.
systems. The respectively applicable country
provisions must be observed when using the   In the case of very high temperatures on
respective features and systems. the Control Display, e.g. due to intense so 
lar radiation, the brightness may be re 
duced down to complete deactivation.
The concept Once the temperature is reduced, e.g.
through shadow or climate control system,
The iDrive combines the functions of many
the normal functions are re-established.
switches. Thus, these functions can be oper 
ated from a central location.
Switching on
Using the iDrive during a trip 1. Turn on operations.
To avoid becoming distracted and pos  2. Press the controller.
ing an unnecessary hazard to your vehicle's
occupants and to other traffic, never attempt Switch off
to use the controls or enter information unless
traffic and road conditions allow it. 
1. Press button.
2. "Turn off control display"
Control elements at a glance
Control elements
Controller
The buttons can be used to open the menus
directly. The controller can be used to select
1 Control Display menu items and enter the settings.
2 Controller with buttons and, depending on Some iDrive functions can be operated using
the equipment version, with touchpad the touchpad on the controller.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 19
iDrive At a glance
1. Turn.
Press button Function
BACK Displays the previous panel.
OPTION Opens the Options menu.
Operating concept
Opening the main menu
Press button.
2. Press.
3. Move in four directions. The main menu is displayed.
All iDrive functions can be called up via the
main menu.
Selecting menu items
Highlighted menu items can be selected.
1. Turn the controller until the desired menu
item is highlighted.
Buttons on controller
Press button Function
MENU Open the main menu.
RADIO Opens the Radio menu.
MEDIA Opens the Multimedia menu.
2. Press the controller.
NAV Opens the Navigation menu.
TEL Opens the phone menu.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 20
At a glance iDrive
Menu items in the Owner's Manual
In the Owner's Manual, menu items that can be
selected are set in quotation marks, e.g.,
"Settings".
Changing between panels
After a menu item is selected, e.g., "Radio", a
new panel is displayed. Panels can overlap.
  Move the controller to the left.
Additional options: move the controller to the
Closes current display and shows previous right repeatedly until the "Options" menu is
display. displayed.
Reopens previous display by pressing
BACK button. In this case, the current Options menu
panel is not closed. The "Options" menu consists of various areas:
  Move the controller to the right.   Screen settings, e.g., "Split screen".
Opens new display on top of previous This area remains unchanged.
screen.
  Control options for the selected main
menu, e.g., for "Radio".
  If applicable, further operating options for
the selected menu, e.g., "Store station".
Changing settings
1. Select a field.
2. Turn the controller until the desired setting
is displayed.
White marks to the left or right indicate that
additional panels can be opened.
Display of an opened menu
When selecting a menu, it generally opens with
the panel that was last selected in that menu.
To display the first panel of a menu:
  Move the controller to the left repeatedly
until the first panel is displayed.
3. Press the controller.
  Press the menu button on the controller
twice.
Activating/deactivating the functions
Several menu items are preceded by a check 
Opening the Options menu
box. It indicates whether the function is acti 
Press button.
vated or deactivated. Selecting the menu item
activates or deactivates the function.
The "Options" menu is displayed.
Function is activated.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 21
iDrive At a glance
Function is deactivated.   To enter an underscore, swipe to the right
in the lower area of the touchpad.
Touchpad Using interactive map and Internet
Via touch-pad move the interactive map in the
Some iDrive functions can be operated using
navigation system and Internet sites.
the touchpad on the controller:
Function Controls
Selecting functions
Move interactive map or Swipe into re 
1. "Settings"
Internet sites. spective direc 
2. "Touchpad" tion.
3. Select the desired function.
Enlarge/shrink interactive Drag in or out on
  "Speller": enter letters and numbers.
map or Internet sites. the touchpad with
  "Interactive map": viewing the interac  fingers.
tive map.
Display the menu or open Tap once.
  "Browser": enter Internet addresses.
a link in the Internet.
  "Audio feedback": pronounces entered
letters and numbers.
Changing settings
You may change control display settings via
Entering letters and numbers
touchpad. Swipe left or right accordingly.
Entering letters requires some practice at the
beginning. When entering, pay attention to the
following:
Example: setting the clock
  For the input of upper/lower case letters
and numbers, it may be necessary to reel
Setting the clock
via the controller to the corresponding In 
On the Control Display:
put mode, refer to page 24, e.g. when the
spelling of upper and lower case letters is
identical. 1. Press button. The main menu is dis 
played.
  Enter characters as they are displayed on
the Control Display. 2. Turn the controller until "Settings" is high 
lighted, and then press the controller.
  Always enter associated characters, such
as accents or periods so that the letter can
be clearly recognized. Possible input de 
pends on the set language. Where neces 
sary, enter special characters via the con 
troller.
  To delete a character, slide to the left on
the touchpad.
  To enter a blank space, slide to the right in
the center of the touchpad.
3. If necessary, move the controller to the left
  To enter a hyphen, slide to the right in the
to display "Time/Date".
upper area of the touchpad.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 22
At a glance iDrive
4. Turn the controller until "Time/Date" is Status field symbols
highlighted, and then press the controller.
The symbols are grouped as follows.
Radio symbols
Symbol Meaning
HD Radio station is being received.
Telephone symbols
Symbol Meaning
5. Turn the controller until "Time:" is high 
lighted, and then press the controller. Incoming or outgoing call.
Missed call.
Wireless network reception
strength.
Symbol flashes: network search.
Wireless network is not available.
Bluetooth is switched on.
Roaming is active.
6. Turn the controller to set the hours and
press the controller. Text message was received.
7. Turn the controller to set the minutes and
Check the SIM card.
press the controller.
SIM card is blocked.
SIM card is missing.
Status information
Enter PIN.
Status field
The following information is displayed in the Entertainment symbols
status field at the top right:
  Time. Symbol Meaning
  Current entertainment source.
Music collection.
  Sound output, on/off.
Gracenote  database.
  Locating the vehicle.
AUX-IN port.
  Wireless network reception strength.
  Phone status.
  Traffic bulletin reception.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 23
iDrive At a glance
Additional symbols 4. Press the controller or select "Split screen
content".
Symbol Meaning
5. Select the desired menu item.
Spoken instructions are turned off.
Check the current vehicle position.
Split screen
General information
Additional information can be displayed on the
right side of the split screen, e.g., information
from the on-board comupter.
Programmable memory
In the divided screen view, the so-called split
buttons
screen, this information remains visible even
when you change to another menu.
General information
Switching the split screen on and off The iDrive functions can be stored on the pro 
On the Control Display: grammable memory buttons and called up di 
rectly, e.g., radio stations, navigation destina 
tions, phone numbers and menu entries.
1. Press button.
Settings are stored for the profile currently in
2. "Split screen"
use.
Selecting the display
Saving a function
On the Control Display:
1. Highlight the function via the iDrive.
1. Press button.
2. Press and hold the desired button,
2. "Split screen" until a signal sounds.
3. Move the controller until the split screen is
Running a function
selected.
Press button.
The function will work immediately.
This means, e.g., that the number is dialed
when a phone number is selected.
Displaying the button assignment
Touch buttons with bare fingers. Do not wear
gloves or use objects.
The key assignment is displayed at top edge of
screen.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 24
At a glance iDrive
Functional requirement
Data can only be deleted while stationary.
Deleting data
Heed and follow the instructions on the Con 
trol Display.
1. Turn on operations.
2. "Settings"
3. Open "Options".
Deleting the button assignments
4. "Delete personal data"
1. Press buttons 1 and 8 simultaneously for
approx. five seconds. 5. "Continue"
2. "OK" 6. "OK"
Deleting personal in the Entering letters and numbers
vehicle
General information
The concept On the Control Display:
Depending on the usage, the vehicle saves
1. Turn the controller: select letters or num 
personal data, such as stored radio stations.
bers.
These personal data can be permanently de 
2. Select additional letters or numbers if
leted through iDrive.
needed.
3. "OK": confirm the entry.
General information
Depending on the equipment package, the fol 
Symbol Function
lowing data can be deleted:
  Personal Profile settings. Press the controller: delete the let 
ter or number.
  Stored radio stations.
  Stored Favorites buttons. Press the controller for an extended
period: delete all letters or numbers.
  Travel and computer information.
  Music collection.
Switching between cases, letters and
  Navigation, e.g. stored destinations.
numbers
  Phone book.
Depending on the menu, you can reel between
  Online data, e.g. Favorites, cookies.
entering upper and lower case, letters and
  Voice notes. numbers:
  Login accounts.
  RemoteApp smartphone tethering.
Altogether, the deletion of the data can take up
to 30 minutes.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 25
iDrive At a glance
Symbol Function
Enter the letters.
Enter the numbers.
or Tip controller up.
Without navigation system
Select the symbol.
Entry comparison
Entering names and addresses: choice is nar 
rowed down with every letter entered and let 
ters may be added automatically.
Entries are continuously compared with data
stored in the vehicle.
  Only those letters are offered during input
for which data is available.
  Target search: names of locations may be
entered in languages available through
Control Display.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 26
At a glance Voice activation system
Voice activation system
Vehicle features and options Using voice activation
This chapter describes all standard, countryActivating the voice activation system
specific and optional features offered with the
series. It also describes features that are not
1. Press button on the steering
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
wheel.
the selected options or country versions. This
2. Wait for the signal.
also applies to safety-related functions and
systems. The respectively applicable country 3. Say the command.
provisions must be observed when using the
A command that is recognized by the voice
respective features and systems.
activation system is announced and dis 
played in the instrument cluster.
This symbol in the instrument cluster indi 
The concept
cates that the voice activation system is active.
  Most functions displayed on the Control If no other commands are available, use func 
Display can be operated by voice com  tion via iDrive.
mands via the voice activation system. The
system supports you with announcements Terminating the voice activation
during input. system
  Functions that can only be used when the
Briefly press the button on the steer 
vehicle is stationary cannot be used via the
ing wheel or  Cancel .
voice activation system.
  The system uses a special microphone on
the driver's side.
Possible commands
   ...  Verbal instructions in the Owner's
Manual to use with the voice activation Most menu items on the Control Display can
system. be voiced as commands.
The available commands depend on the menu
that is currently displayed on the Control Dis 
Requirements
play.
Via the Control Display, set a language that is There are short commands for many functions.
also supported by the voice activation system You may select lists such as phone lists via
so that the spoken commands can be identi  voice activation. Read these lists out loud ex 
fied. actly as they show in the respective list.
Set the language, refer to page 88.
Having possible commands read aloud
You can have available commands read out
loud for you:  Voice commands 
E. g. if the "Settings" menu is displayed, the
commands for the settings are read out loud.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 27
Voice activation system At a glance
Executing functions using short Setting the voice dialog
commands
Set system to standard dialog or use a short
Execute functions on the main menu via short
version.
commands. It almost doesn't matter which
The short version of the voice dialog plays
menu item is selected, e.g.,  Vehicle status .
back short messages in abbreviated form.
Help dialog for the voice activation
1. "Settings"
system
2. "Language/Units"
Calling up help dialog:  Help 
3. "Speech type:"
Additional commands for the help dialog:
4. Select setting.
   Help with examples : announces informa 
tion about the current operating options
and the most important commands for Adjusting the volume
them.
Turn the volume button while giving an in 
   Help with voice activation : information
struction until the desired volume is set.
about the principle of operation for the
voice activation system is announced.   The volume remains constant even if the
volume of other audio sources is changed.
  The volume is stored for the profile cur 
One example: open the tone
rently in use.
settings
Via the main menu Hints on Emergency
Requests
The commands of the menu items are spoken
just as they are selected via the controller.
Do not use the voice activation system to ini 
1. Turn on the Entertainment sound output if tiate an Emergency Request. In stressful situa 
needed. tions, the voice and vocal pitch can change.
This can unnecessarily delay the establish 
2. Press button on the steering ment of a phone connection.
wheel.
Instead, use the SOS button, refer to
3.  Radio  page 196, close to the interior mirror.
4.  Tone 
Environmental conditions
Via short command
The desired tone settings can also be started   Say the commands, numbers, and letters
via a short command. smoothly and with normal volume, empha 
sis, and speed.
1. Turn on the Entertainment sound output if
needed.   Always say commands in the language of
the voice activation system.
2. Press button on the steering   Keep the doors, windows, and glass sun 
wheel. roof closed to prevent noise interference.
3.  Tone 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 28
At a glance Voice activation system
  Avoid making other noise in the vehicle
while speaking.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 29
Integrated Owner's Manual in the vehicle At a glance
Integrated Owner's Manual in the vehicle
Vehicle features and options Select components
This chapter describes all standard, country1. Press button.
specific and optional features offered with the
2. Turn the controller: open "Vehicle info".
series. It also describes features that are not
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to 3. Press the controller.
the selected options or country versions. This 4. Selecting desired range:
also applies to safety-related functions and
  "Quick reference"
systems. The respectively applicable country
  "Search by pictures"
provisions must be observed when using the
respective features and systems.   "Owner's Manual"
Integrated Owner's Manual
in the vehicle
The Integrated Owner's Manual can be dis 
played on the Control Display. It specifically
describes features and functions found in the
vehicle.
Components of the Integrated
Leafing through the Owner's Manual
Owner's Manual
The Integrated Owner's Manual consists of
Page by page with link access
three parts, which offer various levels of infor 
Turn the controller until the next or previous
mation or possible access.
page is displayed.
Quick Reference Guide
Page by page without link access
The Quick Reference Guide provides informa 
Scroll through the pages directly while skip 
tion how to operate the car, how to use basic
ping the links.
vehicle functions or what to do in case of a
breakdown. This information can also be dis  Highlight the symbol once. Now simply press
played while driving. the controller to browse from page to page.
Scroll back.
Search by images
Image search provides information and de 
scriptions. This is helpful when the terminol  Scroll forward.
ogy for a feature is not at hand.
Owner's Manual
Search for information and descriptions by en 
tering terms selected from the index.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 30
At a glance Integrated Owner's Manual in the vehicle
Context help - Owner's Manual to the Programmable memory buttons
temporarily selected function
General information
You may open the relevant information di 
rectly. The Owner's Manual can be stored on the pro 
grammable memory buttons and called up di 
Opening via the iDrive rectly.
To move directly from the application on the
Storing
Control Display to the Options menu:
1. "Owner's Manual" Select via the iDrive.
1. Press button or move the controller
2. Press selected button for more
to the right repeatedly until the "Options"
than 2 seconds.
menu is displayed.
2. "Display Owner's Manual"
Executing
Opening when a Check Control Press button.
message is displayed
The Owner's Manual is displayed im 
Directly from the Check Control message on mediately.
the Control Display:
"Display Owner's Manual"
Changing between a function and the
Owner's Manual
To reel from a function, e. g., radio, to the
Owner's Manual on the Control Display and to
alternate between the two displays:
1. Press button or move the controller
to the right repeatedly until the "Options"
menu is displayed.
2. "Display Owner's Manual"
3. Select the desired page in the Owner's
Manual.
4. Press button again to return to last
displayed function.
5. Press button to return to the page of
the Owner's Manual displayed last.
To alternate permanently between the last dis 
played function and the Owner's Manual re 
peat steps 4 & 5. Opens a new display every
time.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 31
BMW eDRIVE At a glance
BMW eDRIVE
Vehicle features and options At a glance
This chapter describes all standard, countryspecific and optional features offered with the
series. It also describes features that are not
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
the selected options or country versions. This
also applies to safety-related functions and
systems. The respectively applicable country
provisions must be observed when using the
respective features and systems.
1 Vehicle battery
2 Fuel filler flap
BMW eDRIVE
3 High-voltage battery
4 Charging port
Special features of the BMW i
5 Drive unit
High-voltage system
This BMW i is an electric vehicle. The vehicle The concept
features a high-voltage system that consists of
The vehicle can be operated completely emis 
an electric motor and a high-voltage battery
sions free using its electrical drive system.
among other things. Optionally, the vehicle has
The special high-voltage battery supplies the
a combustion engine that generates electrical
electric motor as well as the comfort features
energy via a generator and thereby increases
with power.
the range. This combustion engine is called
the Range Extender. The high-voltage battery is charged via a
charging cable, e.g., when parked or while driv 
Carbon body ing by energy recovery.
The vehicle consists of two different functional Charging can be done especially quickly via
units: the drive module made from aluminum special power connections. However, charging
and the life module made from carbon fiber re  via conventional power supply - at home - is
inforced plastic (carbon). also possible.
On the go, the energy recovery ensures that
only little energy is lost when braking.
When the vehicle decelerates, the electric mo 
tor assumes the function of a generator and
completely or partially converts the freed up
motion energy into electrical power.
As a result the high-voltage battery is partially
recharged in order to reach maximum range.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 32
At a glance BMW eDRIVE
An optional Range Extender can supply the Display
drive system with power and thus increase the
The eDRIVE displays, refer to page 75, pro 
range of the vehicle.
vide information about the current state of the
drive and visualize the system's use in a dia 
Functions
gram.
Electric driving: eDRIVE
Maximize energy-saving driving and
The vehicle is powered exclusively by the elec  range
tric motor. The accelerator pedal can be used
Energy-saving driving is the basic prerequisite
not just for acceleration, but also for decelera 
for as large a range as possible. eDRIVE pro 
tion. In this case, the electric motor works like
vides various functions that assist with an en 
a generator and charges the high voltage bat 
ergy-saving driving style and in the process
tery. With a sensible driving style, this function
help to monitor the range and if needed to in 
can be used for especially efficient energy re 
crease it. The following instructions provide an
covery and comfortable driving, using just the
overview of the available functions and the per 
accelerator pedal.
sonal measures.
Coasting
Before driving
An especially efficient operating point is soeDRIVE allows using the air conditioner even
called coasting. In this case, the vehicle is de 
before driving off. The stationary climate con 
celerated only by driving resistance and no en 
trol, refer to page 133, provides more range
ergy flows between high-voltage battery and
than full air conditioning while driving.
electric motor. In order to coast, depress the
Parked car ventilation during the charging
accelerator pedal far enough that the mark in
process can provide maximum range when
the instrument cluster, refer to page 75, is
driving off.
exactly in the center.
Trip planning and special functions of
Energy recovery: CHARGE
the navigation system
The high-voltage battery is charged while driv 
Several special functions of the navigation sys 
ing through energy recovery.
tem support trip planning taking into account
The electric motor acts as a generator and
the electric range:
converts the kinetic energy of the vehicle into
  Range assistant, refer to Integrated Own 
electric current.
er's Manual. Checks whether an entered
Charging can take place in various situations
navigation destination can be reached. If
while the vehicle is in motion:
the range is not sufficient, various recom 
  As soon as the gas pedal is only slightly mendations to help increase the range are
depressed. displayed automatically, e.g. an alternative
ECO PRO route is displayed.
  During vehicle braking.
  Intermodal routing oder intermodal infor 
The mark in the instrument cluster is located
mation, refer to Integrated Owner's
within the CHARGE range.
Manual, as route criterion support trip
Sensible driving and early speed reduction are
planning using public transportation.
important to make full use of the energy recov 
ery feature.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 33
BMW eDRIVE At a glance
  Range map indicates the action range on
the navigation map, refer to Integrated
Owner's Manual.
  Charging assistant under special destina 
tions in navigation, helps to find and possi 
bly include a public charging station in the
desired route, refer to Integrated Owner's
Manual.
During driving
  General driving tips, refer to page 154, for
increasing the range.
  Use the eDRIVE system efficiently, refer to
page 148, for an optimized driving style.
  ECO PRO driving style analysis, refer to
page 157, for driving style analysis.
  ECO PRO and ECO PRO+ mode, refer to
page 155, for increasing the range.
  Display of the Fuel consumption history,
refer to page 77.
  Display of secondary functions and the po 
tential range, refer to page 78.
After the trip
  Charge vehicle, refer to page 160, and
plan next trip.
  Prepare for long downtimes, refer to
page 203.
BMW i Remote app
A special BMW i Remote App allows to control
and display certain vehicle functions using a
smartphone.
Safety information
Read the information on safe handling of the
high-voltage system, refer to page 34.
Long-term
Follow the instructions for vehicle storage and
for longer idle periods, refer to page 203.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 34
At a glance Safety of the high-voltage system
Safety of the high-voltage system
Safety of the high-voltage   Liquid escapes in the trunk.
system In these cases there is no risk of injury from
electrocution. Other damage to the vehicle is
Working on the vehicle possible.
Maintenance and repairs
High-voltage system: automatic
Have maintenance and repair work per  deactivation
formed only by a service center or a workshop
If an accident occurs, the high-voltage system
that works according to BMW specifications
is switched off automatically to prevent risk of
with appropriately trained personnel. Other 
danger to occupants and other traffic.
wise, there is the risk of fatal injury from elec 
Read the information on What to do after an
trocution due to the high-voltage system's
accident, refer to page 199.
high voltage. 
Body work and working on the high-volt 
age system
Do not perform any modifications or work on
the vehicle, especially maintenance and repair
work on the high-voltage system and the car 
bon body and avoid retrofitting accessories.
If work is not carried out properly, there is the
risk of fire and fatal injury from electrocution
due to the high-voltage system's high voltage.
BMW recommends to have modifications and
work on the vehicle only be carried out by an
authorized BMW i service center or one that
operates according to BMW i specifications
with personnel trained accordingly. 
Your vehicle's high-voltage system is a selfcontained system. Safety is ensured as long as
no work is performed on technical components
or on the chassis.
High-voltage system: contact with
water
The high-voltage system is typically safe even
in the following example situations:
  Water in the footwell, for instance after a
rainstorm when sunroof was kept open.
  Vehicle is in water but only up to the al 
lowed height.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 35
Safety of the high-voltage system At a glance

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Controls
This chapter is intended to provide you with
information that will give you complete control of
your vehicle. All features and accessories that
are useful for driving and your safety, comfort
and convenience are described here.
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 38
Controls Opening and closing
Opening and closing
Vehicle features and options At a glance
This chapter describes all standard, countryspecific and optional features offered with the
series. It also describes features that are not
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
the selected options or country versions. This
also applies to safety-related functions and
systems. The respectively applicable country
provisions must be observed when using the
respective features and systems.
1 Unlocking
2 Locking
Remote control/key
3 Unlocking hood
4   With alarm system: panic mode
General information
  Without panic mode:
The vehicle is supplied with two remote con 
trols with integrated key. Adjustable function: headlight courtesy
delay feature, stationary air condition 
Every remote control holds a replaceable bat 
ing or unlock tailgate.
tery.
You may set the key functions depending on
the optional features and country-specific ver  Integrated key
sion. For Settings, refer to page 48.
The vehicle stores personal settings for every
remote control. Personal Profile, refer to
page 39.
The remote controls hold information on re 
quired maintenance. Service data in the re 
mote control, refer to page 188
Press button, arrow 1, and remove the key, ar 
row 2.
The integrated key fits the driver's door lock.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 39
Opening and closing Controls
Replacing the battery   Interference of radio transmission by
charger while charging items such as mo 
bile devices in the vehicle.
A Check Control message is displayed if one
attempts to turn on the radio-ready state or ac 
tivate engine readiness.
Activation of drive readiness via
emergency detection of the remote
control
1. Remove integrated key from remote con 
trol.
2. Raise the cover of the battery compart 
ment, arrow 1.
3. Remove the cover of the battery compart 
ment, arrow 2.
4. Insert a battery of the same type with the
positive side facing up.
5. Press the cover closed. If a respective Check Control message ap 
pears, hold the remote control with its back
Take the used battery to a recycling
against the marked area on the steering col 
center or to your service center.
umn. The BMW logo on the remote control
should be at the same height as the marked
New remote controls area. Press the Start/Stop button within
New remote controls are available from the 10 seconds while pressing the brake pedal.
service center.
If the remote control is not recognized: slightly
change the height position of the remote con 
Loss of the remote controls
trol and repeat the procedure.
Lost remote controls can be disabled by your
service center.
Personal Profile
Emergency detection of remote
control
The concept
Also in the following situations, radio-ready
Personal Profile provides three profiles, using
state and drive readiness can be established:
which personal vehicle settings can be stored.
  Interference of radio transmission to re  Every remote control has one of these profiles
mote control by external sources e.g., by assigned.
radio masts.
If the vehicle is unlocked using a remote con 
  Empty battery in remote control. trol, the assigned personal profile will be acti 
  Interference from radio transmissions vated. All settings stored in the profile are au 
through mobile devices in close proximity tomatically applied.
to remote control. If several drivers use their own remote control,
the vehicle will adjust the personal settings

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 40
Controls Opening and closing
during unlocking. These settings are also re    The called-up profile is assigned to the re 
stored, if the vehicle has been used in the mote control being used at the time.
meantime by a person with a different remote
  If the profile is already assigned to a differ 
control.
ent remote control, this profile will apply to
Changes to the settings are automatically both remote controls. It cannot be differen 
saved in the personal profile. tiated anymore between the settings for
the two remote controls.
Three personal profiles and a guest profile can
be created.
Renaming profiles
Adjusting A personal name can be assigned to every pro 
file to avoid confusion between the profiles.
The settings for the following systems and
functions are saved in the active profile. The
1. "Settings"
scope of storable settings is country- and
2. "Profiles"
equipment-dependable.
3. "Options"
  Unlocking and locking.
4. "Rename current profile"
  Lights.
  Climate control.
Resetting profiles
  Radio.
The settings of the active profile are reset to
  Instrument cluster. their default values.
  Programmable memory buttons.
1. "Settings"
  Volumes, tone.
2. "Profiles"
  Control Display.
3. "Options"
  Navigation.
4. "Reset current profile"
  Park Distance Control PDC.
Exporting profiles
  Rearview camera
Most settings of the active profile can be ex 
  Driving Dynamics Control.
ported.
  Cruise control.
This can be helpful for securing and retrieving
  Intelligent Safety.
personal settings, before delivering the vehicle
to a workshop, e.g. Profiles can be taken to an 
Profile management
other vehicle equipped with the Personal Pro 
file function.
Opening profiles
The following export options are available:
Regardless of the remote control in use a dif 
  Via BMW Online.
ferent profile may be activated.
  Via the USB port to a USB device.
1. "Settings"
Popular file systems for USB devices are
2. "Profiles"
supported. FAT32 and exFAT are the rec 
3. Select a profile.
  All settings stored in the called-up profile
are automatically applied.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 41
Opening and closing Controls
ommended formats for profile export. 3. "Options"
Other formats may not support the export.
4. "Display user list at startup"
1. "Settings"
2. "Profiles"
Using the remote control
3. "Export profile"
4. BMW Online: "BMW Online"
Note
USB interface: "USB device"
Take the remote control with you
Importing profiles People or animals left unattended in a
parked vehicle can lock the doors from the in 
Profiles exported via BMW Online can also be
side. Always take the remote control with you
imported via BMW Online.
when leaving the vehicle so that the vehicle
Profiles stored on a USB device can be im 
can then be opened from the outside. 
ported via the USB interface.
Existing settings are overwritten with the im  Unlocking
ported profile.
Press button on the remote control.
1. "Settings"
2. "Profiles"   All doors and the tailgate are being un 
3. "Import profile" locked.
4. BMW Online: "BMW Online"   Interior lamps and courtesy lamps are acti 
vated. This function is not available, if the
USB interface: "USB device"
interior lamps were switched off manually.
Using the guest profile   The welcome lamps are switched on, if this
function was activated.
The guest profile is for individual settings that
are saved in none of the three personal pro    Exterior mirrors folded through convenient
files. closing are folded open.
This can be useful for drivers who are using You can set how the vehicle is to be unlocked.
the vehicle temporarily and do not have their For Settings, refer to page 48.
own profile. The alarm system, refer to page 49, is dis 
armed.
1. "Settings"
2. "Profiles"
Convenient opening
3. "Guest"
Press and hold this button on the re 
The guest profile cannot be renamed. It is not mote control after unlocking.
assigned to the current remote control.
The windows and the glass sunroof are
Display profile list during start opened, as long as the button on the remote
control is pressed.
The profile list can be displayed during each
start to select the desired profile.
1. "Settings"
2. "Profiles"

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 42
Controls Opening and closing
Locking Without alarm system: unlocking the
tailgate
Locking from the outside
The Tailgate function must be set for the re 
Do not lock the vehicle from the outside
mote control button. For Settings, refer to
with people inside the car, as the vehicle can 
page 48.
not be unlocked from inside without special
knowledge.  Press button on the remote control for
approx. 1 second.
The driver's door must be closed.
The tailgate opens slightly, regardless of
Press button on the remote control.
whether the vehicle was previously locked or
unlocked.
All doors and the tailgate are being locked.
Depending on the features and the country
The alarm system, refer to page 49, is armed.
version, it is also possible to have door un 
locked. Create the settings, refer to page 48.
Switching on interior lights and
courtesy lights If the doors were not unlocked, the tailgate is
locked again as soon as it closes.
Press button on the remote control with
Do not place the remote control in the
the vehicle locked.
cargo area
This function is not available, if the interior
Take the remote control with you and do not
lamps were switched off manually.
leave it in the cargo area; otherwise, the re 
If the button is pressed again within 10 sec  mote control is locked inside the vehicle when
onds after vehicle was locked, the interior mo  the tailgate is closed. 
tion sensor and tilt alarm sensor of the antiProvide edge protection
theft warning system, refer to page 50, are
turned off. After locking, wait 10 seconds be  Sharp objects or those with edges can
fore pressing the button again. hit the rear window while driving and damage
the heat conductors of the rear window. Pro 
Unlocking hood vide edge protection. 
Press button on the remote control for
approx. 1 second. Without alarm system: switching the
headlamp courtesy delay feature on
Depending on the features and the country
The headlight courtesy delay feature function
version, it is also possible to have door un 
must be set for the remote control button. For
locked. Create the settings, refer to page 48.
Settings, refer to page 48.
If the doors were not unlocked, the hood is
Briefly press the button on the remote
locked again as soon as it is pushed closed.
control.
Do not place the remote control under
the hood The duration can be set in the Control Display.
Take the remote control with you and do not
With alarm system: panic mode
leave it under the hood; otherwise, the remote
control is locked inside the vehicle when the You can trigger the alarm system if you find
hood is closed.  yourself in a dangerous situation.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 43
Opening and closing Controls
Press button on the remote control for   This device may not cause harmful inter 
at least 3 seconds. ference, and
  this device must accept any interference
To reel off the alarm: press any button.
received, including interference that may
cause undesired operation.
Malfunction
Any unauthorized modifications or changes to
Remote control detection by the vehicle can
these devices could void the user's authority to
among others be malfunctioning under the fol 
operate this equipment.
lowing circumstances:
  The battery of the remote control is dis 
charged. Replace the battery, refer to Without remote control
page 39.
  Interference of the radio connection from From the outside
transmission towers or other equipment
Locking from the outside
with high transmit power.
Do not lock the vehicle from the outside
  Shielding of the remote control due to
with people inside the car, as the vehicle can 
metal objects.
not be unlocked from inside without special
  Interference of the radio connection from
knowledge. 
mobile phones or other electronic devices
in direct proximity. Remove the key before pulling the door
handle
Do not transport the remote control together
with metal objects or electronic devices. Before pulling the outside door handle, remove
the key to avoid damaging the paintwork and
In the case of interference, the vehicle can also
the key. 
be unlocked and locked from the outside with 
out remote control, refer to page 43.
Unlock or lock the driver's door via the door
lock using the integrated key, refer to page 38.
For US owners only
The other doors must be unlocked or locked
The transmitter and receiver units comply with from the inside.
part 15 of the FCC/Federal Communication
1. Remove lid on the door lock.
Commission regulations. Operation is gov 
erned by the following: To do this, slide the integrated key into the
opening from below and unlock the lid.
FCC ID:
  LX8766S.
  LX8766E.
  LX8CAS.
  LX8CAS2.
  MYTCAS4.
Compliance statement:
This device complies with part 15 of the FCC
Rules. Operation is subject to the following
two conditions:

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 44
Controls Opening and closing
2. Unlock or lock door lock. The vehicle locks automatically after you drive
off.
In the event of a severe accident, the vehicle is
automatically unlocked. The hazard warning
system and interior lights come on.
Unlocking and opening
  Press the central locking system
button to unlock the doors to 
gether, and then pull the door handle
above the armrest.
Alarm system
  Pull the door opener on the door to be
The alarm system is not armed if the vehicle is opened. The other door remain locked.
locked with the integrated key.
Rear doors
The alarm system is triggered when the door is
opened, if the vehicle was unlocked via the
door lock.
In order to terminate this alarm, unlock vehicle
with the remote control or establish radioready state, if needed, through emergency de 
tection of the remote control, refer to page 39.
From the inside
Unlocking and locking
The rear doors can only be opened using the
handle on the inside, arrow. The correspond 
ing front door must be opened.
To better reach the front door's handle fold the
front seat's backrests, refer to page 54,
down.
Before exiting the vehicle, make sure that the
front safety belt is completely wound up.
When closing, make sure that the correspond 
ing front door is far enough open.
Via the buttons for the central locking system.
  By pressing the button, the vehicle Hood
is locked with the doors closed.
Unlocking from the outside
  Pressing the button unlocks the
Press button on the remote control for
vehicle.
approx. 1 second.
The vehicle is not secured against theft when
locking. The hood is unlocked and slightly raised.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 45
Opening and closing Controls
As the case may be, the doors are also un  Tailgate
locked. Unlocking with the remote control, re 
fer to page 42. Opening
The tailgate swings back and up when it
Unlocking from the inside
opens.
With the vehicle is stationary, press
Ensure that adequate clearance is available
the button in the driver's footwell.
before opening.
The hood is unlocked and slightly raised.
Opening from the outside
Manual release
For example, in case of an electrical malfunc 
tion.
1. Remove cover underneath the unlock but 
tons.
  Press button next to the tailgate.
  Without alarm system: press but 
ton on the remote control for ap 
prox. 1 second.
The Tailgate function must be set for the
remote control button. For Settings, refer
2. Remove wire cable and pull it back.
to page 48.
The hood is unlocked and slightly raised.
As the case may be, the doors are also un 
Opening locked. Unlocking with the remote control,
refer to page 42.
1. Press the release handle and open the
The tailgate is unlocked and can be swung up 
hood.
ward.
Opening from the inside
With the vehicle is stationary, press
the button in the driver's footwell.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 46
Controls Opening and closing
Closing The vehicle automatically detects the remote
control when it is in close proximity or in the
Hints car's interior.
Keep the closing path clear Comfort Access supports the following func 
tions:
Make sure that the closing path of the
tailgate is clear; otherwise, injuries may re    Unlocking/locking of the vehicle.
sult.    Convenient closing.
  Separate unlocking of the tailgate.
Do not place the remote control in the
cargo area   Establish drive readiness.
Take the remote control with you and do not
Functional requirements
leave it in the cargo area; otherwise, the re 
mote control is locked inside the vehicle when   There are no external sources of interfer 
the tailgate is closed.  ence nearby.
  To lock the vehicle, the remote control
Provide edge protection
must be located outside of the vehicle.
Sharp objects or those with edges can
  The next unlocking and locking cycle is not
hit the rear window while driving and damage
possible until after approx. 2 seconds.
the heat conductors of the rear window. Pro 
  Drive readiness can only be established if
vide edge protection. 
the remote control is in the vehicle.
Closing
Unlocking
Recessed grips on the inside trim of the tail 
Grasp the door handle on the driver's or front
gate can be used to conveniently pull down the
passenger door completely, arrow.
tailgate.
This corresponds with pressing the button on
the remote control.
Comfort Access
The concept
The vehicle can be accessed without activat 
ing the remote control.
All you need to do is to have the remote con 
trol with you, such as in your pants pocket.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 47
Opening and closing Controls
Locking Unlocking the tailgate separately
Press button on tailgate's exterior
Without alarm system: This corresponds with
pressing the button on the remote control
, if the tailgate function is set.
The situation of the doors does not change.
Note the opening height of the tailgate
The tailgate swings back and up when it
opens. Ensure that there is sufficient clearance
when the tailgate opens; otherwise, damage
Touch the surface on the door handle of the
may result. 
driver's or front passenger door, arrow, with
your finger for approx. 1 second without grasp 
Do not place the remote control in the
ing the door handle.
cargo area
This corresponds with pressing the button on
Take the remote control with you and do not
the remote control.
leave it in the cargo area; otherwise, the re 
To save battery power, ensure that all power mote control is locked inside the vehicle when
consumers are turned off before locking the the tailgate is closed. 
vehicle.
Malfunction
Convenient closing
Remote control detection by the vehicle can
Monitor closing among others be malfunctioning under the fol 
lowing circumstances:
Monitor closing to ensure that no one
becomes trapped.    The battery of the remote control is dis 
charged. Replace the battery, refer to
page 39.
  Interference of the radio connection from
transmission towers or other equipment
with high transmit power.
  Shielding of the remote control due to
metal objects.
  Interference of the radio connection from
mobile phones or other electronic devices
in direct proximity.
Touch the surface on the door handle of the
driver's or front passenger door, arrow, with Do not transport the remote control together
your finger and hold it there without grasping with metal objects or electronic devices.
the door handle. In the case of a malfunction, unlock and lock
This corresponds to pressing and holding the vehicle using the buttons of the remote
the remote control button. control or using the integrated key, refer to
page 43.
In addition to locking, the windows and the
glass sunroof close and the exterior mirrors
fold in.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 48
Controls Opening and closing
Adjusting   "Tailgate"
The tailgate is unlocked.
Unlocking
  "Tailgate + door(s)"
The settings are saved in the active profile, re 
The tailgate and the doors are un 
fer to page 39.
locked.
Doors
Confirmation signals from the vehicle
1. "Settings"
The settings are saved in the active profile, re 
2. "Doors/key" fer to page 39.
3. Select the symbol.
1. "Settings"
4. Select the desired function:
2. "Doors/key"
  "Driver's door only"
3. Deactivate or activate the desired confir 
Only the driver's door is unlocked. mation signals.
Pressing again unlocks the entire vehi 
  "Acoustic sig. lock/unlock"
cle.
  "Flash when lock/unlock"
  "All doors"
The entire vehicle is unlocked. Automatic locking
The settings are saved in the active profile, re 
Hood
fer to page 39.
Depending on optional features and country
1. "Settings"
version, this setting is not offered in some
cases. 2. "Doors/key"
3. Select the desired function:
1. "Settings"
  "Lock if no door is opened"
2. "Doors/key"
The vehicle locks automatically after a
3. Select the symbol.
short period of time if no door is
4. Select the desired function:
opened.
  "Front compartment lid"
Without alarm system: headlamp
The hood is unlocked.
courtesy delay feature/standing
  "Front lid and door(s)"
climate control
The hood and the doors are unlocked.
The settings are saved in the active profile, re 
fer to page 39.
Without alarm system: tailgate
1. "Settings"
Depending on optional features and country
version, this setting is not offered in some 2. "Doors/key"
cases.
3. Select the symbol.
1. "Settings" 4. Select the desired function:
2. "Doors/key"   "Pathway lighting"
3. Select the symbol. Headlight courtesy delay feature
4. Select the desired function:   "Comfort climate control"

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 49
Opening and closing Controls
Stationary climate control Press button on the remote control for
at least 3 seconds.
Alarm system To switch off the alarm: press any button.
Indicator lamp on the interior rearview
The concept
mirror
When the vehicle is locked, the vehicle alarm
system responds to:
  Opening a door, the hood or the tailgate.
  Movements in the interior.
  Changes in the vehicle tilt, e. g., during at 
tempts at stealing a wheel.
  Disconnected battery voltage.
The alarm system briefly signals tampering:
  By sounding an acoustic alarm.
  The indicator lamp flashes briefly every
  By switching on the hazard warning sys 
2 seconds:
tem.
The system is armed.
  By flashing the daytime running lights.
  The indicator lamp flashes after locking:
Arming and disarming the alarm The doors, hood or tailgate is not closed
system properly, but the rest of the vehicle is se 
cured.
When you unlock or lock the vehicle, either
After 10 seconds, the indicator lamp
with the remote control or via the Comfort Ac 
flashes continuously. Interior motion sen 
cess, the alarm system is disarmed or armed at
sor and tilt alarm sensor are not active.
the same time.
When the still open access is closed, inte 
Door lock and armed alarm system rior motion sensor and tilt alarm sensor will
be switched on.
The alarm system is triggered when the door is
opened, when the vehicle is unlocked via the   The indicator lamp goes out after unlock 
door lock. ing:
The vehicle has not been tampered with.
Tailgate and armed alarm system
  The indicator lamp flashes after unlocking
The tailgate can be opened even when the
until the radio-ready state is switched on,
alarm system is armed.
but no longer than approx. 5 minutes:
After the tailgate is closed, it is locked and
An alarm has been triggered.
monitored again when the doors are locked.
The hazard warning system flashes once.
Tilt alarm sensor
Panic mode The tilt of the vehicle is monitored.
You can trigger the alarm system if you find The alarm system responds in situations such
yourself in a dangerous situation. as attempts to steal a wheel.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 50
Controls Opening and closing
Interior motion sensor Power windows
The windows and glass sunroof must be
closed for the system to function properly. Hint
Take the remote control with you
Avoiding unintentional alarms
Take the remote control with you when
The tilt alarm sensor and interior motion sen 
leaving the vehicle so that children, e.g., can 
sor can be switched off together, such as in
not operate the power windows and injure
the following situations:
themselves. 
  In automatic car washes.
  In duplex garages.
  During transport on trains carrying vehi 
cles, at sea or on a trailer.
  With animals in the vehicle.
Switching off the tilt alarm sensor and
interior motion sensor
Press the remote control button again
within 10 seconds as soon as the vehicle
Opening
is locked.
The indicator lamp lights up for approx. 2 sec 
  Press the button to the resistance
onds and then continues to flash.
point.
The tilt alarm sensor and interior motion sen 
The window opens while the switch is held.
sor are turned off, until the vehicle is locked
again.
  Press the switch beyond the resist 
ance point.
Switching off the alarm
The window opens automatically. Pressing
  Unlock vehicle with the remote control or the switch again stopse the motion.
establish radio-ready state, if needed
See also: Convenient opening, refer to
through emergency detection of remote
page 41, via remote control.
control, refer to page 39.
  With Comfort Access: if you are carrying Closing
the remote control on your person, grasp
Keep the closing path clear
the driver side or front passenger side door
handle completely. Monitor closing and make sure that the
closing path of the window is clear; otherwise,
injuries may result. 
  Pull the switch to the resistance
point.
The window closes while the switch is
held.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 51
Opening and closing Controls
Glass sunroof, powered
  Pull the switch beyond the resistance
point.
General information
The window closes automatically. Pulling
The glass sunroof is operational when the igni 
again stops the motion.
tion is switched on.
See also: closing by means of Comfort Access,
Keep the closing path clear
refer to page 46.
Monitor closing and make sure that the
Pinch protection system closing path of the glass sunroof is clear; oth 
erwise, injuries may result. 
Danger of jamming even with pinch pro 
tection Take the remote control with you
Even with the pinch protection system, check Take the remote control with you when
that the window's closing path is clear; other  leaving the vehicle so that children, e.g., can 
wise, the closing action may not stop in certain not operate the glass sunroof and injure them 
situations, e.g., if thin objects are present.  selves. 
No window accessories
Do not install any accessories in the win 
dow's range of movement; otherwise, the
pinch protection system will be impaired. 
If closing force exceeds a specific margin as a
window closes, closing is interrupted.
The window reopens slightly.
Closing without the pinch protection
system Tilting the glass sunroof
Keep the closing path clear Push switch briefly upward.
Monitor closing and make sure that the   The closed glass sunroof is
closing path of the window is clear; otherwise, tilted.
injuries may result. 
  The opened glass sunroof
E.g. danger from the outside or ice might pre  closes until it is in its tilted
vent window from closing properly - proceed position. The sliding visor
as follows: does not move.
1. Pull the reel past the resistance point and
hold it there. Opening/closing the glass sunroof and
sliding visor together
The pinch protection is limited and the
window reopens slightly if the closing force   Press the reel in the desired
exceeds a certain margin. direction to the resistance
point and hold it there.
2. Pull the reel past the resistance point again
within approx. 4 seconds and hold it there. The glass sunroof moves as
long as the reel is held
The window closes without jam protection.
down.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 52
Controls Opening and closing
  Press the reel in the desired direction past The pinch protection is limited and the
the resistance point. glass sunroof reopens slightly if the closing
force exceeds a certain margin.
The glass sunroof moves automatically.
2. Press the reel forward again beyond the re 
Pressing the reel upward stops the motion.
sistance point and hold until the glass sun 
  Open and close the sliding visors manually.
roof closes without jam protection. Make
sure that the closing area is clear.
Additional options:
  Convenient opening, refer to page 41, via
Closing from the raised position
the remote control.
without pinch protection
  Closing by means of Comfort Access, refer
If there is an external danger, push the reel for 
to page 46.
ward past the resistance point and hold it.
The glass sunroof closes without jam protec 
Comfort position
tion.
If the glass sunroof is not automatically com 
pletely opened, the comfort position has been
Initializing after a power failure
attained. In this position the wind noises in the
After a power failure during the opening or
interior are the least.
closing process, the glass sunroof can only be
If desired, continue the movement by pressing
operated to a limited extent.
the reel.
Initializing the system
Pinch protection system
The system can be initialized when the vehicle
If the glass sunroof while closing exceeds a
is stationary and drive readiness is established.
certain value, the closing operation is inter 
During the initialization, the glass sunroof
rupted at roughly the center of the roof open 
closes without jam protection.
ing.
The glass sunroof reopens slightly. Keep the closing path clear
Monitor closing and make sure that the
Danger of jamming even with pinch pro 
closing path of the glass sunroof is clear; oth 
tection
erwise, injuries may result. 
Despite the pinch protection system, check
that the glass sunroof's closing path is clear; Press the reel up and hold it until
otherwise, the closing action may not be inter  the initialization is complete:
rupted in certain extreme situations, such as
  Initialization begins within
when thin objects are present. 
15 seconds and is com 
pleted when the glass sun 
Closing from the open position
roof is completely closed.
without pinch protection
  The glass sunroof closes without jam pro 
E. g. if there is an external danger, proceed as tection.
follows:
1. Press the reel forward beyond the resist 
ance point and hold.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 53
Adjusting Controls
Adjusting
Vehicle features and options Keep the movement area unobstructed
When changing the seat position, keep
This chapter describes all standard, countrythe seat's area of movement unobstructed;
specific and optional features offered with the
otherwise, people might get injured or objects
series. It also describes features that are not
damaged. 
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
the selected options or country versions. This
Adjusting seats
also applies to safety-related functions and
systems. The respectively applicable country
At a glance
provisions must be observed when using the
respective features and systems.
Sitting safely
The ideal seating position can make a vital
contribution to relaxed, fatigue-free driving.
The seating position plays an important role in
an accident in combination with:
  Safety belts, refer to page 55.
1 Forward/backward 53
  Head restraints, refer to page 56.
2 Height 54
  Airbags, refer to page 93.
3 Backrest tilt 54
Seats Forward/backward
Hints
Do not adjust the seat while driving
Do not adjust the driver's seat while driv 
ing, or the seat could respond with unexpected
movement and the ensuing loss of vehicle
control could lead to an accident. 
Do not incline the backrest too far to the
rear Pull the lever and slide the seat in the desired
Do not incline the backrest too far to the rear direction.
while driving, or there is a risk of slipping under After releasing the lever, move the seat for 
the safety belt in the event of an accident. This ward or back slightly making sure it engages
would eliminate the protection normally pro  properly.
vided by the belt. 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 54
Controls Adjusting
Height Fold down seat back
1. Pull lever up to the stop.
Pull the lever and apply your weight to the seat
or lift it off, as necessary.
2. Fold backrest forward.
Backrest returns to its initial position after re 
Backrest tilt lease.
Front seat heating
Pull the lever and apply your weight to the
backrest or lift it off, as necessary.
Switching on
Backrest
Press button once for each tempera 
Note ture level.
The maximum temperature is reached when
Folding back and locking the backrest
three LEDs are lit.
Before driving off, fold back and lock the
If the journey is continued within approx. 15
backrests; otherwise, an unexpected seat
minutes, the seat heating is activated automat 
movement may cause an accident. 
ically with the temperature selected last.
If ECO PRO+, refer to page 155, is activated,
the seat heating is deactivated.
Switch off
Press button longer.
The LEDs go out.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 55
Adjusting Controls
Safety belts Buckling the belt
Seats with safety belt
The vehicle has four seats, each of which is
equipped with a safety belt.
General information
Always make sure that safety belts are being
worn by all occupants before driving off.
For the occupants' safety the belt locking
Make sure you hear the latch plate engage in
mechanism triggers early. Slowly guide the
the belt buckle.
belt out of the holder when applying it.
Although airbags enhance safety by providing
added protection, they are not a substitute for Unbuckling the belt
safety belts.
1. Hold the belt firmly.
The upper shoulder strap's anchorage point
2. Press the red button in the belt buckle.
will be correct for adult seat occupants of ev 
3. Guide the belt back into its roll-up mecha 
ery build if the seat is correctly adjusted.
nism.
Hints
Safety belt reminder for driver's and
One person per safety belt passenger's seat
Never allow more than one person to
The indicator lamp lights up and a sig 
wear a single safety belt. Never allow infants or
nal sounds. Make sure that the safety
small children to ride on a passenger's lap. 
belts are positioned correctly. The
safety belt reminder is active at speeds above
Putting on the belt
approx. 6 mph/10 km/h. It can also be activated
Lay the belt, without twisting, snugly
if objects are placed on the front passenger
across the lap and shoulders, as close to the
seat.
body as possible. Make sure that the belt lies
low around the hips in the lap area and does
Damage to safety belts
not press on the abdomen. Otherwise, the belt
can slip over the hips in a frontal impact and in  Wear and tear after accidents or when dam 
jure the abdomen. aged otherwise:
The safety belt must not lie across the neck, Have the safety belts, including the safety belt
rub on sharp edges, be routed over breakable tensioners, replaced and have the belt anchors
objects, or be pinched.  checked.
Check and replace safety belts
What reduces the restraining effect
This should only be done by your service
Avoid wearing bulky clothing, and pull
center; otherwise, this safety feature might not
the shoulder belt periodically to readjust the
work properly. 
tension. Make sure that the belt is not jammed;
otherwise, the belt can be damaged and the
restraining effect is reduced. 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 56
Controls Adjusting
Front head restraints Folding down head restraints
Extending/retracting head restraint
Distance
Only fold down head restraint if no pas 
The spacing is adjusted to the back of the
sengers are in the rear. Fold out retracted
head using the incline of the seat backrest.
headrests again if passengers are being car 
Adjust the distance so that the head restraint ried in the rear; otherwise, there is increased
is as close as possible to the back of the head. risk of injury in the event of an accident. 
Removing
The head restraints cannot be removed.
Rear head restraints
Correctly adjusted head restraint
A correctly adjusted head restraint reduces the
risk of injury to cervical vertebrae in the event
  To lower flaps: press the button, arrow 1,
of an accident.
and press down the head restraint, arrow 2.
Adjusting the head restraint   Fold back up: pull up head restraints.
Adjust the head restraints of all occupied
seats properly; otherwise, there is an increased
Removing
risk of injury in an accident. 
Only remove the head restraint if no one will be
sitting in the seat in question.
Height
Fold the seat down, refer to page 142, before
Adjust the head restraint so that its center is
removing the head restraint, otherwise the
approximately at ear level.
head restraint cannot be removed.
Adjusting the height
1. Raise the head restraint up against the re 
sistance.
  To raise: push.
2. Press button, arrow 1, and pull the head re 
  To lower: press button, arrow 1, and push
straint out completely.
headrest down.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 57
Adjusting Controls
Before transporting passengers Selecting a mirror
Reinstall the head restraint before trans  To change over to the other mirror:
porting anyone in the seat; otherwise, the pro 
Slide the switch.
tective function of the head restraint is unavail 
able. 
Adjusting electrically
The setting corresponds to the direc 
Mirrors
tion in which the button is pressed.
Exterior mirrors
Adjusting manually
General information In case of electrical malfunction press edges of
mirror.
The mirror on the passenger side is more
curved than the driver's side mirror.
Automatic Curb Monitor
Depending on the vehicle equipment, the mir 
ror setting is stored for the profile currently in
The concept
use. When the vehicle is unlocked via the re 
If reverse gear is engaged, the mirror glass on
mote control, the position is automatically re 
the front passenger side is tilted downward.
trieved if this function is active.
This improves your view of the curb and other
low-lying obstacles when parking, e.g.
Note
Estimating distances correctly Activating
Objects reflected in the mirror are closer
than they appear. Do not estimate the distance 1. Slide the switch to the driver's side
to the traffic behind you based on what you mirror position.
see in the mirror, as this will increase your risk 2. Engage selector lever position R.
of an accident. 
Deactivating
At a glance Slide the switch to the passenger side mirror
position.
Automatic cornering adjustment
The concept
During right-hand turns, the mirror glass is
turned. Provides a better view of the vehicle
sideways.
Note
1 Adjusting 57
Personal responsibility
2 Left/right, Automatic Curb Monitor, Auto 
matic cornering adjustment The system does not serve as a substi 
tute for the driver's personal judgment of the
3 Fold in and out 58
traffic situation.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 58
Controls Adjusting
Be aware of the traffic situation and the vehi  Automatic dimming feature
cle's surroundings at all times, otherwise acci 
Both exterior mirrors are automatically dim 
dents are still possible depending on the situa 
med. Photocells are used to control the Interior
tion. 
rearview mirror, refer to page 58.
Requirements Interior rearview mirror, manually
dimmable
  Vehicle moving.
  Speed less than 12 mph/20 km/h.
Flip lever
  Turn signal is set.
Activating
Slide the switch to the driver's side
mirror position.
Deactivating
Slide the switch to the passenger side mirror
position.
To reduce the blinding effect of the interior
rear view mirror, flip the lever forward.
Fold in and out
Press button.
Interior rearview mirror, automatic
dimming feature
Possible at speeds up to approx.
15 mph/20 km/h.
The concept
E. g. this is advantageous
  In car washes.
  In narrow streets.
  For folding mirrors back out that were
folded away manually.
Mirrors that were folded in are folded out auto 
matically at a speed of approx.
25 mph/40 km/h.
Fold in the mirror in a car wash
Photocells are used for control:
Before washing the car in an automatic
  In the mirror glass.
car wash, fold in the exterior mirrors by hand or
  On the back of the mirror.
with the button; otherwise, the mirrors could
be damaged, depending on the width of the
vehicle.  Functional requirement
For proper operation:
Automatic heating
  Keep the photocells clean.
Both exterior mirrors are automatically heated
whenever drive readiness is switched on.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 59
Adjusting Controls
  Do not cover the area between the inside
rearview mirror and the windshield.
Steering wheel
Note
Do not adjust while driving
Do not adjust the steering wheel while
driving; otherwise, an unexpected movement
could result in an accident. 
Adjusting
1. Fold the lever down.
2. Move the steering wheel to the preferred
height and angle to suit your seating posi 
tion.
3. Fold the lever back.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 60
Controls Transporting children safely
Transporting children safely
Vehicle features and options the selected options or country versions. This
also applies to safety-related functions and
This chapter describes all standard, countrysystems. The respectively applicable country
specific and optional features offered with the
provisions must be observed when using the
series. It also describes features that are not
respective features and systems.
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
The right place for children
Note Note
Children in the vehicle Deactivating the front-seat passenger
airbags
Do not leave children unattended in the
vehicle; otherwise, they could endanger them  If a child restraint system is used in the front
selves and other persons, e.g., by opening the passenger seat, deactivate the front-seat pas 
doors.  senger airbags; otherwise, there is an in 
creased risk of injury to the child when the air 
bags are activated, even with a child restraint
Children should always be in the rear
system. 
Accident research shows that the safest place
for children is in the back seat.
Transporting children in the rear Installing child restraint
Only transport children younger than systems
13 years of age or shorter than 5 ft/150 cm in
the rear in child restraint systems provided in
Hints
accordance with the age, weight and size of
the child; otherwise, there is an increased risk Manufacturer's information for child re 
of injury in an accident. straint systems
Children 13 years of age or older must wear a To select, mount and use child restraint sys 
safety belt as soon as a suitable child restraint tems, observe the information provided by the
system can no longer be used due to their age, system manufacturer; otherwise, the protec 
weight and size.  tive effect can be lost. 
Ensuring the stability of the child seat
Children on the front passenger seat
When installing child restraint systems,
Should it ever be necessary to use a child re 
make sure that the child seat is securely fas 
straint system in the front passenger seat,
tened to the backrest of the seat. Angle and
make sure that the front, knee and side airbags
headrest of the backrest might need to be ad 
on the front passenger side are deactivated.
justed or possibly be removed. Make sure that
Automatic deactivation of front-seat passen 
all backrests are securely locked. Otherwise
ger airbags, refer to page 95.
the stability of the child seat can be affected,
and there is an increased risk of injury because

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 61
Transporting children safely Controls
of unexpected movement of the seat back  Child seat security
rest. 
On the front passenger seat
Deactivating airbags
Deactivating the front-seat passenger
airbags
If a child restraint system is used in the front
passenger seat, deactivate the front-seat pas 
senger airbags; otherwise, there is an in  The rear safety belts and the front passenger
creased risk of injury to the child when the air  safety belt can be permanently locked to fas 
bags are activated, even with a child restraint ten child restraint systems.
system.  The front passenger safety belt can be perma 
nently locked to fasten child restraint systems.
After installing a child restraint system in the
front passenger seat, make sure that the front,
knee and side airbags on the front passenger Locking the safety belt
side are deactivated.
1. Pull out the strap completely.
Deactivate the front-seat passenger airbags
2. Secure the child restraint system with the
automatically, refer to page 95.
belt.
3. Allow the strap to be pulled in and pull it
Seat position and height
tight against the child restraint system.
Before installing a child restraint system, move
The safety belt is locked.
the front passenger seat as far back as possi 
ble and adjust its height to the highest and
Unlocking the safety belt
thus best possible position for the belt and to
1. Unbuckle the belt buckle.
offer optimal protection in the event of an acci 
dent. 2. Remove the child restraint system.
If the upper anchorage of the safety belt is lo  3. Allow the strap to be pulled in completely.
cated in front of the belt guide of the child seat,
move the passenger seat carefully forward un 
til the best possible belt guide position is
reached.
LATCH child restraint system
LATCH: Lower Anchors and Tether for Chil  Note
dren.
Follow manufacturer's information for
LATCH child restraint systems
To mount and use the LATCH child restraint
systems, observe the operating and safety in 
formation from the system manufacturer; oth 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 62
Controls Transporting children safely
erwise, the level of protection may be re  Child restraint fixing system with a
duced.  tether strap
Mounting points
Mounts for the lower LATCH anchors
The lower anchors may be used to attach the The respective symbol shows the an 
CRS to the vehicle seat up to a combined child chor for the upper retaining strap.
and CRS weight of 65 lb/30 kg when the child Seats with an upper Top Tether are
is restrained by the internal harnesses. marked with this symbol. It can be found on
the rear seat backrest or the rear window shelf.
Note
Properly engage the lower LATCH an  Note
chors
Mounting eyelets
Make sure that the lower LATCH anchors have
Use the mounting eyes only for the up 
properly engaged and that the child restraint
per retaining strap to secure child restraint
system is resting snugly against the backrest;
systems; otherwise, the mounting eyes could
otherwise, the degree of protection may be re 
be damaged. 
duced. 
Retaining strap guide
Position
Retaining strap
The corresponding symbol shows the
Make sure that the upper retaining strap
mounts for the lower LATCH anchors.
is not passed over the head restraints or sharp
Seats equipped with lower anchors are
edges and is not twisted up to the upper
marked with a pair, 2, of LATCH sym 
mounting points; otherwise, the belt cannot
bols. It is not recommended to use the
properly secure the child restraint system in an
inner lower anchors of standard outer
accident. 
LATCH positions to fasten a child restraint
system on the middle seat. Use the vehicle
seat belt instead for the middle seat.
Before installing LATCH child
restraint systems
Pull the belt away from the area of the child re 
straint system.
Assembly of LATCH child restraint
systems 1 Direction of travel
1. Mount the child restraint system; refer to 2 Head restraint
the user's manual of the system.
3 Hook for upper retaining strap
2. Ensure that both LATCH anchors are prop 
4 Mounting point/eye
erly connected.
5 Seat backrest
6 Upper retaining strap

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 63
Transporting children safely Controls
Attaching the upper retaining strap to
the mounting point
1. Raise the head restraint if needed.
2. Guide the upper retaining strap between
the supports of the head restraint.
3. If there is a retaining strap, run it between
the backrest and the cargo cover.
4. Attach the hook of the retaining strap to
the mounting eye.
5. Tighten the retaining strap by pulling it
down.
6. Lower and lock head restraints as needed.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 64
Controls Driving
Driving
Vehicle features and options Pressing the Start/Stop button again switches
drive readiness back off and radio-ready state
This chapter describes all standard, countryis switched back on.
specific and optional features offered with the
series. It also describes features that are not
Radio ready state
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
the selected options or country versions. This Some electronic systems/power consumers
also applies to safety-related functions and are ready for operation.
systems. The respectively applicable country
The radio-ready state is switched off automati 
provisions must be observed when using the
cally:
respective features and systems.
  After approx. 8 minutes.
  When the vehicle is locked using the cen 
Start/Stop button tral locking system.
  If the charging state of the batteries is low.
Overview
The radio-ready state remains active if, e.g.,
the drive readiness is automatically switched
Button in the vehicle
off for the following reasons:
  Opening or closing the driver's door.
  Unfastening of the driver's safety belt.
  When automatically switching from low
beams to parking lights.
Radio ready state is switched back on if the
on/off button on the radio is pressed when the
vehicle is parked.
Operating readiness
1 Start/Stop button
All electronic systems/power consumers are
2 Park P
ready for operation. Odometer and trip odome 
3 Selector lever ter are displayed in the instrument cluster.
To preserve the battery, use operating readi 
The concept ness and activated power features only as long
as absolutely necessary.
Pressing the Start/Stop button
switches drive readiness on or Operating readiness is switched off:
off.   When locking the vehicle, even if the low
Drive readiness starts with the beams are activated.
brake pedal pressed when you   When opening or closing the driver door, if
press the Start/Stop button. the driver's safety belt is unbuckled and
the low beams are turned off.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 65
Driving Controls
  While the driver's safety belt is unbuckled Drive readiness in detail
with driver's door open and low beams off.
  When the batteries' state of charge is low, Hints
if the low beams are turned off.
Do not leave the vehicle unattended
  The low beams switch to parking lights af 
Do not leave the vehicle unattended with
ter approx. 15 minutes of no use.
drive readiness switched on; otherwise, it may
pose a risk. 
Drive readiness
If drive readiness is switched on, the vehicle Before leaving the vehicle
ready to drive and the READY signal, refer to Before leaving the vehicle, with drive
page 65, is displayed in the instrument clus  readiness switched on engage lever in position
ter. P P and set the parking brake; otherwise, the
All vehicle systems are ready for operation. vehicle is not secured against rolling away. 
Most of the indicator and warning lights in the
instrument cluster light up for a varied length Switching on drive readiness
of time. 1. Close the driver's door.
Activated drive readiness is the equivalent of a 2. Depress the brake pedal.
running engine in conventional vehicles. Deac 
3. Press the Start/Stop button.
tivated engine readiness is equivalent to
Drive readiness is switched on.
switching the ignition off.
To save battery power when parking, switch
Display in the instrument cluster
off drive readiness and any unnecessary elec 
tronic systems/power consumers. The READY display indicates
that the vehicle is ready for driv 
Drive readiness is switched off automatically:
ing.
  When opening or closing the driver door, if
the driver's safety belt is unbuckled.
Note
Display on the Start/Stop button
If drive readiness is switched on, the system
automatically switches to the radio-ready state General information
when the door is opened and the driver's
safety belt is unbuckled, or if the lights are
turned off or the daytime running lights are ac 
tivated.
Selector lever position P with drive readi 
ness switched off
When drive readiness is switched off, selector
lever position P is automatically engaged.
When in an automatic car wash, e.g., ensure
that the drive readiness is not switched off ac  Drive readiness is also displayed through light
cidentally, otherwise, wheels can lock up.  indicators on the Start/Stop button.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 66
Controls Driving
Lighting pulses orange Selector lever positions
  After unlocking and opening the door.
  After switching off drive readiness.
When the brake pedal is depressed, the light 
ing becomes more intense.
Lighting lights up steady blue
After drive readiness is switched on, light turns
blue. The vehicle is ready to drive. The READY
indicator lights up in the instrument cluster. In
The engaged selector lever position is dis 
addition, a signal sounds.
played on the selector lever.
Lighting off
Drive readiness, operating readiness and D Drive
radio-ready state are turned off. The vehicle is Position for normal vehicle operation.
in the idle state. The charging cable may be
connected. R is Reverse
Select only when the vehicle is stationary.
Driving off
N is Neutral
Requirements
Use in automatic car washes, e.g. The vehicle
Driving is possible under the following condi 
may roll.
tions:
  The high-voltage battery is sufficiently P Park
charged.
Engage only while the vehicle is stationary and
  The driver's door is closed. the brake is applied. The drive wheels are
blocked.
Driving
P is engaged automatically:
1. Switch on drive readiness.
  If the belt on the driver's seat is off, the
2. Apply the brake and engage lever in posi  driver's door is open and neither brake nor
tion P D or R. accelerator pedal are depressed while
3. Release the parking brake. drive readiness is switched on and selector
lever position D or R is set.
4. Depress the accelerator pedal to drive.
  After switching off drive readiness via the
Start/Stop button, if selector lever posi 
tion D or R is set.
  With operating readiness turned off.
Before exiting the vehicle, make sure that se 
lector lever position P is set. Otherwise, the ve 
hicle may begin to move. On uphill slopes, also
Set parking brake, refer to page 70.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 67
Driving Controls
Engaging selector lever positions Electronic unlocking of the
transmission lock
General information
General information
  Interlock: the selector lever position P can
be exited only with drive readiness en  Electronically unlock the transmission lock to
gaged. maneuver vehicle from the danger area.
  Shift lock: with the vehicle stationary, press
Engaging selector lever position N
on the brake pedal before shifting out of P
or N; otherwise, the shift command will not 1. Press and hold the Start/Stop button.
be executed.
2. Depress the brake pedal.
  Shift lock: before shifting out of P, remove
3. Turn and hold the selector lever in posi 
the charging cable from the vehicle; other 
tion N.
wise, the shift command will not be exe 
A corresponding Check Control message
cuted.
is displayed.
Engaging N, D, R 4. Turn the selector lever again into posi 
tion N within approx. 2 seconds.
Position N is indicated on the selector
lever.
5. Release Start/Stop button and brake.
6. Maneuver the vehicle from the danger area
and secure it against moving on its own.
Switch off drive readiness
Park the car. Noises from the electrical system
Turn the selector lever in the desired direction. such as for cooling the high-voltage system
The engaged selector lever position is dis  might still be audible.
played on the selector lever. After stopping the vehicle:
1. Apply brake and engage lever in position
Engaging P
P P.
2. Set the parking brake.
3. Press the Start/Stop button.
The READY indicator goes out and a signal
sounds.
In case of longer idle times, follow the in 
structions in the Care chapter, refer to
page 203.
Before driving into a car wash
Press button P.
So that the vehicle can roll into a car wash ob 
serve instructions for going into an automatic
car wash, refer to page 200.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 68
Controls Driving
Driving in detail: eDRIVE ally, the brake lights will come on without hit 
ting the brakes.
Hints
Energy recovery: CHARGE
Awareness of vehicle reduced when
The high-voltage battery is recharged in part
driven in electric mode
through energy recovery. The electric motor
When driving in electric mode, note that, due
acts as a generator when decelerating and
to the lack of engine noise, pedestrians and
converts the kinetic energy into electrical en 
other traffic might pay less attention to the ve 
ergy.
hicle due to missing engine noises. Please
Energy can be recovered if the following condi 
take special care when parking or leaving a
tions are met:
parking space. 
  The vehicle is moving.
Cautiously remove your foot from the ac 
  Speed higher than approx.
celerator pedal
12 mph/20 km/h.
Cautiously remove your foot from the acceler 
  Selector lever position D or R is set.
ator pedal because the braking effect of the
  Gas pedal is not actuated or only pressed
electric motor can be stronger than with a
down 1/3 of the way.
combustion engine. Otherwise, abrupt braking
and slow-down may confuse other traffic.  Energy cannot be recovered in the following
situations:
Accelerator pedal positions   Selector lever position N is set.
  While drive stability control systems, e.g.
DTC, are active and control the vehicle,
even though this is not indicated by an in 
dicator light.
  The high-voltage battery is fully charged.
  When temperature of the high-voltage bat 
tery is very low or very high.
In winter it might be possible that the en 
ergy recovery is temporarily unavailable af 
1 Deceleration
ter startup.
2 Coasting
Always be ready to apply the brake
3 Acceleration or constant speed: ePOWER
Always be ready to apply the brake, be 
cause without energy recovery there is also no
Deceleration braking action through the electric drive unit.
The deceleration depends on the position of The vehicle could roll further than anticipated.
the accelerator pedal. The less the actuation of This may constitute a danger for other traffic. 
the accelerator pedal, the greater the decelera 
tion. In this way energy is recovered and the Exemplary traffic situations
high-voltage battery is charged.
If a deceleration operation is foreseeable while
Releasing the accelerator pedal causes decel 
driving, this can be used for energy recovery.
eration similar to cautious braking. Addition 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 69
Driving Controls
The following exemplary driving situations may Automatic maintenance run
show that:
To ensure that the Range Extender functions
  Decelerating downhill. properly even during longer periods of nonuse, the Range Extender is automatically acti 
  Deceleration before a red light.
vated for a few minutes at certain intervals dur 
Avoid late or abrupt braking. Instead, deceler 
ing the trip. Respective Check Control
ate the vehicle using energy recovery.
messages indicate the dry run. Should that oc 
cur at an unfavorable time you may cancel the
Coasting
dry run by pressing the Start/Stop button. It
The electric drive makes it possible to roll with  postpones the dry run.
out consuming energy. This driving condition
Should the high-voltage battery be fully
is referred to as coasting.
charged or if there is not enough gas in the
Proactive driving reduces energy consumption tank then a dry run will not be executed.
and increases the range.
With vehicle rolling, no energy is recovered. Heavily discharged high-voltage
battery
Exemplary traffic situations
If the high-voltage battery is heavily dis 
If a route can be traveled without anticipated charged during the trip, the performance and
need for braking, it is advantageous to roll. some comfort features are reduced step-bystep to extend the range.
The following exemplary driving situations may
show that:
Heated high-voltage battery
  Rolling on a straight downhill route without
obstacles.
With a stationary dirt
  Coasting on a route without obstacles.
In exceptional cases, it is possible that the
Avoid late or abrupt braking. high-voltage battery heats up sharply when the
vehicle is stationary. E. g. with extreme exter 
Range Extender nal temperatures and direct solar radiation.
With a overheated high-voltage battery, drive
Increase range readiness cannot be switched on.
If the charging state of the high-voltage battery A Check Control message is displayed.
drops during travel to a minimum value, the
Another message will indicate when drive
Range Extender starts and supplies the re 
readiness is available again.
quired electrical energy for driving on.
The symbol on the charging state indicator While driving
designates a Range Extender reel-on time.
If the high-voltage battery overheats during the
The Range Extender controls its output auto  trip, the performance is reduced step-by-step
matically, turns itself off and restarts according in order to cool down the battery. The ePO 
to the driving situation. WER performance display in the instrument
The high-voltage battery will not be charged cluster returns in the process. When tempera 
by the Range Extender. ture increases further, park the vehicle until the
high-voltage batter has cooled down. Should
the performance display fall to 0, drive readi 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 70
Controls Driving
ness is switched off and the vehicle comes to a While driving
stop.
Use as emergency brake while driving:
Pull the reel and hold it. The vehicle brakes
hard while the reel is being pulled.
Parking brake
The indicator lamp lights up red, a sig 
The concept nal sounds and the brake lights light
up.
The parking brake is used to prevent the vehi 
cle from rolling when it is parked. A Check Control message is displayed.
If the vehicle is slowed down down to a speed
Overview
of approx. 2 mph/3 km/h the parking brake is
set.
Releasing
With drive readiness switched on:
Press the reel while stepping on the
brake pedal or selector lever position P is
set.
The LED and indicator lamp go out.
Parking brake The parking brake is released.
Automatic release
Setting
For automatic release, step on the accelerator
Apply parking brake and further secure pedal.
the vehicle if needed.
The LED and indicator lamp go out.
Set the parking brake firmly when parking; oth 
The parking brake is automatically released
erwise, the vehicle could roll. On steep upward
when you step on the accelerator:
and downward inclines, further secure the ve 
  Drive readiness switched on.
hicle, e.g., by turning the steering wheel in the
direction of the curb.    Drive mode engaged.
  Driver buckled in and doors closed.
Take the remote control with you
Inadvertent operation of the accelerator
Take the remote control with you when
pedal
leaving the vehicle so that children, e.g., can 
not release the parking brake.  Make sure that the accelerator pedal is not op 
erated unintentionally; otherwise, the vehicle is
Pull the reel.
set in motion and there is a risk of an acci 
The LED lights up. dent. 
The indicator lamp lights up red. The
Malfunction
parking brake is set.
In the event of a failure or malfunction of the
parking brake, secure the vehicle against roll 
ing using a wheel chock, e.g., when leaving it.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 71
Driving Controls
After a power failure Turn signal, high beams,
headlight flasher
Putting the parking brake into
operation
Turn signal
1. Switch on the ignition.
Hints
2. Press the reel while stepping on the
Do not adjust the exterior mirrors
brake pedal or selector lever position P is
set. Do not adjust the exterior mirror while
driving and when turn signals/hazard warning
It may take several seconds for the brake to be
flashers are on, or else the additional turn sig 
put into operation. Any sounds associated with
nal lights in the exterior mirror are out of posi 
this are normal.
tion and can't be seen. 
The indicator lamp in the instrument
cluster goes out as soon as the parking
Using turn signals
brake is ready for operation.
Hold function
The concept
The system holds the vehicle automatically
when gear is engaged. This prevents rolling
against the direction of travel.
In selector lever position D, the vehicle cannot Press the lever beyond the resistance point.
roll backwards. In selector lever position R, it
To switch off manually, press the lever to the
cannot roll forward. The brake pedal does not
resistance point.
have to be pressed.
Unusually rapid flashing of the indicator lamp
Hints indicates that a turn signal bulb has failed.
To reduce energy consumption when the hold
Triple turn signal activation
function is activated, activate the parking brake
or engage lever in position P P when the vehi  Press the lever to the resistance point.
cle is stopped for long periods of time.
The turn signal flashes three times.
The hold function can be by the vehicle's load
The function can be activated or deactivated.
and the road incline. If needed a Check Control
On the Control Display:
message will appear and position P will be se 
lected automatically. 1. "Settings"
2. "Lighting"
3. "Triple turn signal"
Settings are stored for the profile currently in
use.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 72
Controls Driving
Signaling briefly Switching on
Press the lever to the resistance point and hold
it there for as long as you want the turn signal
to flash.
High beams, headlight flasher
Push wiper lever up.
The lever automatically returns to its initial po 
sition when released.
  Normal wiper speed: push up once.
The wipers switch to intermittent operation
  High beams, arrow 1.
when the vehicle is stationary.
  Headlight flasher, arrow 2.
  Fast wiper speed: press up twice or press
once beyond the resistance point.
Wipers change to normal speed when ve 
Washer/wiper system
hicle comes to standstill.
Switching the wipers on/off and brief
Switch off and brief wipe
wipe
Hints
Do not activate wipers if frozen to wind 
shield
Do not switch on the wipers if they are frozen
to the windshield; otherwise, the wiper blades
and the wiper motor may be damaged. 
Do not activate wipers on dry windshield
Push wiper lever down.
Do not use the wipers if the windshield is
The lever automatically returns to its initial po 
dry, as this may damage the wiper blades or
sition when released.
cause them to become worn more quickly. 
  Single wipe: press down once.
  To switch off normal wipe: press down
once.
  To switch off fast wipe: press down twice.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 73
Driving Controls
Interval mode or rain sensor Clean the windshield
The concept
The rain sensor automatically controls the time
between wipes depending on the intensity of
the rainfall. The sensor is located on the wind 
shield, directly behind the interior rearview mir 
ror.
Activating/deactivating
Pull the wiper lever towards you.
The system sprays washer fluid on the wind 
shield and activates the wipers briefly.
Do not use the washer system at freezing
temperatures
Do not use the washers if fluid could freeze
onto the windshield which might impede your
viewing field. Therefore use antifreeze fluid.
Press button on the wiper lever.
Avoid using the washer when the reservoir is
Wiping is started. If the vehicle is equipped empty; operation might damage pump. 
with a rain sensor: LED in wiper lever lights up.
When wipers are frozen to windshield, wiper Windshield washer nozzles
operation is deactivated.
The windshield washer nozzles are automati 
cally heated while operating readiness is
Deactivate the rain sensor in car washes
switched on.
Deactivate the rain sensor when passing
through an automatic car wash; otherwise, un 
Rear window wiper
intentional wiping can cause damages. 
Switching on the rear window wiper
Setting the frequency or sensitivity of
the rain sensor
Turn the switch from idle position 0 upward,
arrow 1: interval mode. When reverse gear is
Turn the thumbwheel. engaged, the system switches to continuous
operation.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 74
Controls Driving
Cleaning rear window Only keep it in the closed original container
and inaccessible to children.
In interval mode: turn the switch further, ar 
row 2. The switch automatically returns to its Follow the notes and instructions on the con 
interval position when released. tainer.
In idle position: turn switch downward, arrow 3. United States: The washer fluid mixture ratio is
The switch automatically returns to its idle po  regulated by the U.S. EPA and many individual
sition when released. states; do not exceed the allowable washer
fluid dilution ratios limits that apply. Follow the
Fold-out position of the wipers usage instructions on the washer fluid con 
tainer. Use BMW's Windshield Washer Con 
Fold wipers back when you want to change the
centrate or the equivalent. 
blades or with pending low temperatures.
1. Switch operating readiness on and off
Washer fluid reservoir
again.
2. With icy conditions make sure that blades
are not frozen to the windshield.
3. Press the wiper lever up beyond the point
of resistance and hold it for approx. 3 sec 
onds, until the wiper remains in a nearly
vertical position.
After the wipers are folded back down, the
wiper system must be reactivated.
Folding wipers back down All washer nozzles are supplied from one res 
ervoir.
Before switching operating readiness on,
fold the wipers back down to the windshield; Fill with a mixture of windshield washer con 
otherwise, the wipers may become damaged centrate and tap water and - if required - with a
when they are activated.  washer antifreeze, according to the manufac 
turer's recommendations.
1. Turn on operations.
Mix the washer fluid before adding to find the
2. Push wiper lever down. Wipers move to
right mixture.
their resting position and are ready again
Do not add windshield washer concentrate and
for operation.
antifreeze undiluted and do not fill with pure
water; this could damage the wiper system.
Washer fluid Do not mix window washer concentrates of dif 
ferent manufacturers because they can clog
Hints the windshield washer nozzles.
Recommended minimum fill quantity:
Antifreeze for washer fluid
0.2 US gal/1 liter.
Antifreeze is flammable and can cause
injury if it is used incorrectly.
Therefore, keep it away from possible sources
of ignition.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 75
Displays Controls
Displays
Vehicle features and options the selected options or country versions. This
also applies to safety-related functions and
This chapter describes all standard, countrysystems. The respectively applicable country
specific and optional features offered with the
provisions must be observed when using the
series. It also describes features that are not
respective features and systems.
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
Instrument cluster
The concept
The instrument cluster is a variable display. may differ from the way they are shown in this
Some of the displays in the instrument cluster Owner's Handbook.
At a glance
1 Computer 86 7 Driving Dynamics Control program 108
2 Driver assistance systems 8 Range for electric driving 83
3 Speedometer 9 Battery charge indicator 77
4 Drive readiness indicator 65 10 Performance display 77
5 ECO PRO tips 155 Selection list, such as for the radio 85
6 Trip odometer 82 11 Range Extender range 83

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 76
Controls Displays
12 Range Extender fuel gauge 82 14 Display, drive mode 66
13 Messages, e.g. Check Control
Charging screen
1 Charging status 166 5 Range for electric driving 166
2 End of charging time 166 6 Charging state 77
Departure time with timer 167 7 Range Extender range 83
3 Maximum electrical range 166 8 With Range Extender: fuel gauge 82
4 Stationary climate control 167
Displaying the eDRIVE   Electric driving: ePOWER.
system   Energy recovery: CHARGE.
  Drive readiness: READY.
Displays in the instrument cluster
The concept
The display depends on the system's operat 
ing condition. The following functions of the
eDRIVE system are shown in the instrument
cluster:
  High-voltage battery charge indicator.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 77
Displays Controls
High-voltage battery charge indicator Performance display
High voltage The accelerator pedal indicator in the perform 
ance display indicates the current efficiency of
Even if no fill level bars are displayed next
the driving style. The efficient range of the per 
to the battery symbol, the high-voltage system
formance display is colored blue.
is still under high voltage. 
Accelerator pedal indicator in the CHARGE
The fill level bars indicate the available charg 
range, arrow 1: display for energy recovered by
ing state of the high-voltage battery when op 
coasting or when decelerating.
erating readiness and drive readiness are
Accelerator pedal indicator in the ePOWER
switched on.
range, arrow 2: display when accelerating.
With a low range the color of the charging sta 
Use eDRIVE efficiently, refer to page 148.
tus indicator switches from blue to yellow.
In addition, the range for electric driving is dis 
Drive readiness: READY
played.
The READY display indicates
that the vehicle is ready for driv 
With Range Extender: maintaining
ing. Drive readiness in detail, re 
charging state
fer to page 65.
Indications on the Control Display
Fuel consumption history
The arrow on the charging state indicator
designates the Range Extender reel-on time. If
Range Extender is activated, the current
charging state of the high-voltage battery is
maintained.
  Gray arrow: Range Extender deactivated.
The top bars indicate the average energy con 
  White arrow: Range Extender activated. sumed while driving time, arrow 1. The lower

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 78
Controls Displays
bars indicate the average energy recovered   Blue: electrical energy
while driving time, arrow 2.
  White: activated secondary functions.
One bar indicates one minute.
Displaying energy distribution
The eDRIVE system's average fuel consump 
tion is indicated by a line above the bar display 1. "Vehicle info"
and as a value on the right next to the graph.
2. "eDRIVE"
3. "Comfort information"
Displaying fuel consumption history
1. "Vehicle info"
2. "eDRIVE" Check Control
3. "CHARGE"
The concept
Energy flow of the eDRIVE system The Check Control system monitors functions
in the vehicle and notifies you of malfunctions
in the monitored systems.
A Check Control message is displayed as a
combination of indicator or warning lights and
text messages in the instrument cluster.
In addition, an acoustic signal may sound and a
text message may appear on the Control Dis 
play.
The display shows the active components of Indicator/warning lights
the eDRIVE system:
General information
  Blue: electrical energy.
The indicator and warning lights in the instru 
  Arrow: direction of the energy flow.
ment cluster can light up in a variety of combi 
  Segments of the high-voltage battery sym 
nations and colors.
bolize the charging state.
Several lights indicate function checks and
  The operating states are displayed:
light up only temporarily when drive readiness
"ePOWER", "CHARGE".
or operating readiness are activated.
  Interior cooling/heating function switched
on. Red lights
Displaying the energy flow Safety belt reminder
1. "Vehicle info"
Flashing or illuminated: safety belt on
2. "eDRIVE" the driver or passenger side is not
buckled. The safety belt reminder can
3. "Energy flow"
also be activated if objects are placed on the
front passenger seat.
Energy distribution
Make sure that the safety belts are positioned
Beside the current range the display shows the
correctly.
energy distribution and the potential range if
individual secondary functions are turned off.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 79
Displays Controls
Airbag system Orange lights
Airbag system and belt tensioner are
Active Cruise Control
defective.
The number bars shows the selected
Have the vehicle checked by the serv 
distance from the vehicle driving
ice center immediately.
ahead.
For additional information, refer to Active
Parking brake
Cruise Control with Stop & Go function, ACC,
The parking brake is set. refer to page 110.
Vehicle detection, Active Cruise Control
For additional information, refer to Release
parking brake, refer to page 70. Illuminated: vehicle driving ahead de 
tected.
Brake system
Flashing: the conditions are not ade 
Continue to drive moderately. quate for operating the system.
Have the vehicle checked by the serv  The system was deactivated but applies the
ice center immediately. brakes until you actively resume control by
pressing on the brake pedal or accelerator
pedal.
Front-end collision warning
Yellow lights
Illuminated: advance warning is issued,
e.g., when there is the impending dan  Anti-lock Braking System ABS
ger of a collision or the distance to the
Avoid abrupt braking if possible. Brak 
vehicle ahead is too small.
ing force boost in some cases defec 
Increase distance.
tive. Stop carefully. Take into account
Flashing: acute warning of the imminent dan  longer brake travel. Have this checked
ger of a collision when the vehicle approaches by the service center immediately.
another vehicle at a relatively high differential
speed.
DSC Dynamic Stability Control
Intervention by braking or make an evasive ma 
Flashing: DSC controls the drive and
neuver.
braking forces. The vehicle is stabi 
lized. Reduce speed and adapt driving
Pedestrian warning
profile to the driving circumstances.
If a collision with a person detected in Illuminated: DSC failed. Have the system
this way is imminent, the symbol lights checked by the service center.
up and a signal sounds.
For additional information, refer to Dynamic
Stability Control DSC, refer to page 107.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 80
Controls Displays
DSC Dynamic Stability Control is Steering system
deactivated or DTC Dynamic Traction
Steering system in some cases defec 
Control is activated
tive.
Dynamic Stability Control DSC is
Have the steering system checked by
switched off or Dynamic Traction Con 
the service center.
trol DTC is switched on.
For additional information, refer to Dynamic
Engine functions
Stability Control, refer to page 107, and Dy 
namic Traction Control, refer to page 108. Have the vehicle checked by the serv 
ice center.
For additional information, refer to OnFlat Tire Monitor FTM
board Diagnostics socket, refer to page 189.
The Flat Tire Monitor signals a loss of
tire inflation pressure in a tire.
Green lights
Reduce your speed and stop cau 
tiously. Avoid sudden braking and steering ma 
Turn signal
neuvers.
Turn signal on.
For more information, see Flat Tire Monitor, re 
fer to page 99. Unusually rapid flashing of the indicator
lamp indicates that a turn signal bulb
has failed.
Tire Pressure Monitor TPM
For additional information, refer to Turn signal,
Illuminated: the Tire Pressure Monitor
refer to page 71.
signals a loss of tire inflation pressure
in a tire.
Parking lights, headlight control
Reduce your speed and stop cautiously. Avoid
sudden braking and steering maneuvers. Parking lights or headlights are acti 
vated.
Flashing and then continuously illuminated: no
flat tire or loss of tire inflation pressure can be For additional information, refer to
detected. Parking lights/low beams, headlight control, re 
fer to page 90.
  Interference through systems or devices
with the same radio frequency: after leav 
ing the area of the interference, the system Cruise control
automatically becomes active again.
The system is switched on. It maintains
  TPM could not conclude the reset: perform
the speed that was set using the con 
the reset of the system again.
trol elements on the steering wheel.
  A wheel without TPM electronics is fitted:
have the service center check it if needed.
Blue lights
  Malfunction: have the system checked by
your service center. High beams
For more information, see Tire Pressure Moni 
High beams are activated.
tor, refer to page 96.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 81
Displays Controls
For additional information, refer to High Hiding Check Control messages
beams, refer to page 72.
General lamps
Check Control
At least one Check Control message is
displayed or is stored. The symbol is
shown in the display of the instrument
cluster.
Press the onboard computer button on the
turn signal lever.
Text messages
Text messages in combination with a symbol   Some Check Control messages are dis 
in the instrument cluster explain a Check Con  played continuously and are not cleared
trol message and the meaning of the indicator until the malfunction is eliminated. If sev 
and warning lights. eral malfunctions occur at once, the mes 
sages are displayed consecutively.
Supplementary text messages
These messages can be faded for approx.
Additional information, such as on the cause of 8 seconds. After this time, they are dis 
an error or the required action, can be called up played again automatically.
via Check Control.   Other Check Control messages are faded
With urgent messages the added text will be automatically after approx. 20 seconds.
automatically displayed on the Control Display. They are stored and can be displayed
again later.
Symbols
Displaying stored Check Control
Depending on the Check Control message, the
messages
following functions can be selected.
On the Control Display:
  "Owner's Manual"
Display additional information about the 1. "Vehicle info"
Check Control message in the Integrated 2. "Vehicle status"
Owner's Manual.
3. "Check Control"
  "Service request"
4. Select the text message.
Contact your service center.
  "Roadside Assistance" Messages after trip completion
Contact Roadside Assistance. Special messages displayed while driving are
displayed again after drive readiness is
switched off.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 82
Controls Displays
With Range Extender: fuel Odometer and trip odometer
gauge
Display
The fill level bars indicate the available fuel
  Odometer, arrow 1, Scope of the on-board
supply of the Range Extender when operating
computer, refer to page 86.
readiness and drive readiness are switched on.
  Trip odometer, arrow 2.
Additional range of the Range Extender on top
of pure electric range. If the Range Extender is
Show/reset kilometers: TRIP
activated, the color of the fill level bar indicator
switches from gray to white.
Vehicle tilt position may cause the display to
vary.
Hints on refueling, refer to page 169.
Coolant temperature
If the coolant along with the engine becomes
too hot, a Check Control message is displayed.
Press the knob.
Check the coolant level, refer to page 186.
  With operating readiness turned off, the
time, the external temperature and the od 
ometer are displayed.
  When operating readiness is switched on,
the trip odometer is reset.
External temperature
If the indicator drops to +37  /+3   or lower, a
signal sounds.
A Check Control message is displayed.
There is an increased risk of ice on roads.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 83
Displays Controls
Ice on roads Hints
Even at temperatures above Observe range
+37  /+3  , roads might be icy.
Always make sure that the range is suffi 
Therefore, drive carefully on bridges and cient for the planned trip. The range is dynamic
shaded roads, e.g., to avoid the increased risk and can abruptly change. 
of an accident. 
Increase range, refer to page 148.
Time
Service requirements
The time is displayed in the computer.
The concept
Setting the time and time format, refer to
page 88. The driving distance or the time to the next
scheduled maintenance is displayed briefly in
the instrument cluster after operating readi 
Range ness is switched on.
Your service specialist can read the current
The expected range for the energy stored in
service requirements from your remote con 
the high-voltage battery is displayed on the
trol.
right side of the instrument cluster next to the
charging state indicator of the high-voltage
Display
battery.
Data regarding the service status or legally
With Range Extender:
mandated vehicle inspections are automati 
The range of the Range Extender is displayed
cally transmitted to your service center before
separately next to the fuel gauge. The total
a service due date.
range can be displayed via the on-board com 
puter. Expanding the range with Range Ex  Detailed information on service
tender, refer to page 69. requirements
Two Check Control messages indicate a lim 
More information on the scope of service re 
ited range.
quired can be displayed on the Control Dis 
The range display is dynamic. play.
The range can be abruptly reduced or in  On the Control Display:
creased based on the following factors:
1. "Vehicle info"
  Driving style.
2. "Vehicle status"
  Traffic conditions.
3. "Service required"
  Program change via Driving Dynamics
Required maintenance procedures and le 
Control.
gally mandated inspections are displayed.
  Climate and terrain conditions.
4. Select an entry to call up detailed informa 
  Automatic climate control settings.
tion.
  After determination of a route by the navi 
gation system.
  When exiting a route or recalculating a
route.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 84
Controls Displays
Symbols Speed limit detection
Sym  Description The concept
bols
Speed limit detection
No service is currently required.
Speed limit detection uses a symbol in the
shape of a traffic sign to display the currently
The deadline for scheduled mainte  detected speed limit. The camera in the area of
nance or a legally mandated inspec  the interior rearview mirror detects traffic signs
tion is approaching. at the edge of the road as well as variable over 
head sign posts. Traffic signs with extra sym 
The service deadline has already
bols for wet road conditions, etc. are also de 
passed.
tected and compared with the vehicle's
onboard data, such as for the rain sensor, and
will be displayed depending on the situation.
Entering appointment dates
The system takes into account the information
Enter the dates for the required inspections. stored in the navigation system and also dis 
Make sure that the vehicle's date and time are plays speed limits present on routes without
set correctly. signs.
On the Control Display:
Hints
1. "Vehicle info"
Personal judgment
2. "Vehicle status"
The system cannot serve as a substitute
3. "Service required"
for the driver's personal judgment of the traffic
4. "  Vehicle inspection" situation.
5. "Date:" The system assists the driver and does not re 
place the human eye. 
6. Adjust the settings.
7. Confirm.
At a glance
The entered date is stored.
Camera
Automatic Service Request
Data regarding the service status or legally
mandated vehicle inspections are automati 
cally transmitted to your service center before
a service due date.
You can check when your service center was
notified.
On the Control Display:
1. "Vehicle info"
The camera is found near the interior rearview
2. "Vehicle status"
mirror.
3. Open "Options".
4. "Last Service Request"

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 85
Displays Controls
Keep the windshield in the area behind the in    In the event of incorrect detection by the
terior rearview mirror clean and clear. camera.
  If the speed limits stored in the navigation
Switching on/off system are incorrect.
On the Control Display:   In areas not covered by the navigation sys 
tem.
1. "Settings"
  When roads differ from the navigation,
2. "Instrument cluster"
such as due to changes in road routing.
3. "Speed limit information"
  When passing buses or trucks with a
If speed limit detection is switched on, it can speed sticker.
be displayed on the info display in the instru 
  If the traffic signs are non-conforming.
ment cluster.
  During calibration of the camera immedi 
ately after vehicle shipment.
Display
The following is displayed in the instrument
cluster: Selection lists in the
instrument cluster
Speed limit detection
Current speed limit. The concept
Depending on your vehicle's optional features,
the following can be displayed or operated us 
ing the buttons and the thumbwheel on the
steering wheel and the display in the instru 
Speed limit detection is not ment cluster:
available.
  Current audio source.
  Redial phone feature.
  Turn on voice activation system.
It also displays programs of the Driving Dy 
System limits namics Control.
The system may not be fully functional and
may provide incorrect information in the fol 
lowing situations:
  In heavy fog, rain or snowfall.
  When signs are concealed by objects.
  When driving very close to the vehicle in
front of you.
  When driving toward bright lights.
  When the windshield behind the interior
rearview mirror is fogged over, dirty or cov 
ered by a sticker, etc.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 86
Controls Displays
Display Calling up information on the info
display
Depending on your vehicle's optional features,
the list in the instrument cluster can differ from Press the onboard computer button on the
the illustration shown. turn signal lever.
Information is displayed in the info display of
Activating a list and adjusting the the instrument cluster.
setting
Information at a glance
Repeatedly pressing the button on the turn
signal lever calls up the following information in
the info display:
  Kilometers.
  With Range Extender: total range
  Average fuel consumption.
  Current fuel consumption.
On the right side of the steering wheel, turn   Average speed.
the thumbwheel to activate the corresponding
  External temperature.
list.
  Time.
Using the thumbwheel, select the desired set 
  Speed limit detection.
ting and confirm it by pushing the thumbwheel.
Adjusting displays for computer
You can select what information from the com 
On-board computer
puter is to be displayed in the instrument clus 
ter.
Display in the instrument cluster
On the Control Display:
The information from the computer is shown in
the upper left area of the instrument cluster. 1. "Settings"
2. "Instrument cluster"
3. Select the desired displays.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 87
Displays Controls
Information in detail 2. "Trip computer"
3. "Reset": all values are reset.
With Range Extender: total range
"Automatically reset": all values are reset
The total range considers the approx. 4 hours after the vehicle came to a
capacity of the fuel tank as well standstill.
as the electric energy in the
high-voltage battery. Display on the Control Display
Display the computer or trip computer on the
Control Display.
Average fuel consumption
1. "Vehicle info"
The average fuel consumption is calculated on
the basis of various distances. Standstill with 2. "Onboard info" or "Trip computer"
drive readiness turned off is not considered.
Resetting the fuel consumption or
Current fuel consumption speed
Displays the current energy consumption. The On the Control Display:
efficiency of the driving can be monitored.
1. "Vehicle info"
Average speed 2. "Onboard info"
3. "Consumpt." or "Speed"
Periods when vehicle is parked with drive read 
iness switched off are not included when cal  4. "Yes"
culating average speed.
Resetting average values Speed warning
Press and hold the onboard computer button
on the turn signal lever. The concept
Displays a speed, when reached, should cause
Speed limit detection
a warning to be issued.
Description of the speed limit detection, refer The warning is repeated if the vehicle speed
to page 84, function. drops below the set speed once by at least
3 mph/5 km/h.
Trip computer
The vehicle features two types of board com  Displaying, setting or changing the
puters. speed warning
  "Onboard info": the values can be reset as On the Control Display:
often as necessary.
1. "Settings"
  "Trip computer": the values provide an
2. "Speed"
overview of the current trip.
3. "Warning at:"
Resetting the trip computer 4. Turn the controller until the desired speed
is displayed.
On the Control Display:
5. Press the controller.
1. "Vehicle info"
Speed warning is stored.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 88
Controls Displays
Activating/deactivating the speed 3. "Format:"
warning
4. Select the desired format.
On the Control Display:
The time format is stored.
1. "Settings"
Automatic time setting
2. "Speed"
Depending on your vehicle's optional features,
3. "Warning"
the time, date and, if needed, the time zone are
4. Press the controller. updated automatically.
1. "Settings"
Setting your current speed as the
speed warning 2. "Time/Date"
On the Control Display: 3. "Auto time set"
1. "Settings"
Date
2. "Speed"
3. "Select current speed" Setting the date
4. Press the controller. 1. "Settings"
The current vehicle speed is stored as the 2. "Time/Date"
speed warning. 3. "Date:"
4. Turn the controller until the desired day is
displayed.
Settings on the Control
5. Press the controller.
Display
6. Make the necessary settings for the month
and year.
Time
The date is stored.
Setting the time
Setting the date format
1. "Settings"
1. "Settings"
2. "Time/Date"
2. "Time/Date"
3. "Time:"
3. "Format:"
4. Turn the controller until the desired hours
are displayed. 4. Select the desired format.
5. Press the controller. The date format is stored.
6. Turn the controller until the desired mi 
Language
nutes are displayed.
7. Press the controller.
Setting the language
The time is stored.
To set the language on the Control Display:
Setting the time format 1. "Settings"
1. "Settings" 2. "Language/Units"
2. "Time/Date" 3. "Language:"
4. Select the desired language.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 89
Displays Controls
Settings are stored for the profile currently in 2. "GPS tracking"
use.
3. "GPS tracking"
Setting the voice dialog
Voice dialog for the voice activation system,
refer to page 27.
Units of measure
Setting the units of measure
To set the units for fuel consumption, route/
distance and temperature:
1. "Settings"
2. "Language/Units"
3. Select the desired menu item.
4. Select the desired unit.
Settings are stored for the profile currently in
use.
Brightness
Setting the brightness
To set the brightness of the Control Display:
1. "Settings"
2. "Control display"
3. "Brightness"
4. Turn the controller until the desired bright 
ness is set.
5. Press the controller.
Settings are stored for the profile currently in
use.
Depending on the light conditions, the bright 
ness settings may not be clearly visible.
Activating/deactivating display of the
current vehicle position
If GPS geolocation has been activated, the cur 
rent vehicle position can be displayed in the
BMW i Remote App or in the ConnectedDrive
customer portal.
1. "Settings"

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 90
Controls Lights
Lights
Vehicle features and options With driver's door open and operating readi 
ness turned off, the exterior lighting will be
This chapter describes all standard, countryturned off automatically.
specific and optional features offered with the
series. It also describes features that are not Parking lights
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
Position of switch : the vehicle's lights
the selected options or country versions. This
light up on all sides, e.g., for parking.
also applies to safety-related functions and
Do not use the parking lights for extended pe 
systems. The respectively applicable country
riods; otherwise, they might drain the battery
provisions must be observed when using the
and disable drive readiness.
respective features and systems.
When parking, it is preferable to switch on the
one-sided roadside parking lights, refer to
Overview page 91.
Low beams
Position of switch with operating readi 
ness switched on: the low beams light up.
Welcome lights
When the vehicle is parked, leave the switch in
position or : parking and interior lights
come on briefly when the vehicle is unlocked
depending on the ambient brightness.
1 Rear fog lights
2 Depending on the equipment: automatic
Activating/deactivating
headlamp control, welcome lamps, day 
On the Control Display:
time running lights
3 Lights off, daytime running lights 1. "Settings"
4 Parking lights / daytime running lights 2. "Lighting"
5 Low beams/welcome lights 3. "Welcome lights"
6 Headlight range control Settings are stored for the profile currently in
use.
7 Instrument lighting
Headlight courtesy delay feature
The low beams stay lit for a short while if the
Parking lights/low beams,
headlight flasher is switched on after the radioheadlight control
ready state is switched off.
General information
Position of switch: , ,

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 91
Lights Controls
Setting the duration 2. "Lighting"
On the Control Display: 3. "Daytime running lamps"
Settings are stored for the profile currently in
1. "Settings"
use.
2. "Lighting"
3. "Pathway lighting:" Roadside parking lights
4. Set length of time.
Settings are stored for the profile currently in
use.
Automatic headlight control
Position of switch : the low beams are acti 
vated and off automatically, e.g., in tunnels, in
twilight or if there is precipitation. The indicator
lamp in the instrument cluster lights up.
When emerging from a tunnel during the day, The vehicle can be illuminated on one side.
the low beams are not switched off immedi 
ately but instead only after approx. 2 minutes. Switching on
A blue sky with the sun low on the horizon can With operating readiness switched off, press
cause the lights to be switched on. the lever either up or down past the resistance
point for approx. 2 seconds.
Personal responsibility
The automatic headlight control cannot Switch off
serve as a substitute for your personal judg 
Briefly press the lever to the resistance point in
ment in determining when to turn the lights on
the opposite direction.
in response to ambient lighting conditions.
E. g. the sensors are unable to detect fog or
hazy weather. To avoid safety risks under Instrument lighting
these conditions, you should always switch on
the lights manually. 
Adjusting
The parking lights or low beams
Daytime running lights
must be switched on to adjust
With the ignition switched on, the daytime run 
the brightness.
ning lights light up in position , or
Adjust the brightness with the
. After operating readiness is switched off,
thumbwheel.
the parking lights light up in position .
Activating/deactivating
Interior lights
In some countries, daytime running lights are
mandatory, so it may not be possible to deacti 
vate the daytime running lights. General information
On the Control Display: The interior lights, footwell lights, access lights
and courtesy lights are controlled automati 
1. "Settings"
cally.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 92
Controls Lights
Thumb wheel for the instrument lighting con  With a color scheme selected and welcome
trols brightness of some of these features. lights activated they illuminate in the line's
color when vehicle is unlocked.
Overview
Setting the brightness
The brightness of the ambient light can be ad 
justed via the thumbwheel for the instrument
lighting or on the Control Display.
On the Control Display:
1. "Settings"
2. "Lighting"
3. "Brightness:"
1 Interior lights 4. Adjust the brightness.
2 Reading lamp
Switching the interior lights on and off
Press button.
To reel off permanently: press the button for
approx. 3 seconds.
Switch back on: press button.
Reading lights
Press button.
Reading lights are located in the front next to
the interior light.
Ambient light
Depending on your optional features lighting
can be adjusted for some lights in the interior.
Selecting color scheme
On the Control Display:
1. "Settings"
2. "Lighting"
3. "Ambient:"
4. Select desired setting.
To deactivate the ambient light: "Off".

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 93
Safety Controls
Safety
Vehicle features and options the selected options or country versions. This
also applies to safety-related functions and
This chapter describes all standard, countrysystems. The respectively applicable country
specific and optional features offered with the
provisions must be observed when using the
series. It also describes features that are not
respective features and systems.
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
Airbags
1 Front airbag, driver 4 Side airbag
2 Front airbag, front passenger 5 Knee airbags
3 Head airbag
Front airbags Side airbags
Front airbags help protect the driver and front In a lateral impact, the side airbag supports the
passenger by responding to frontal impacts in side of the body in the chest and lap area.
which safety belts alone would not provide ad 
equate restraint. Head airbags
In a lateral impact, the head airbag supports
the head.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 94
Controls Safety
Knee airbag   Do not apply adhesive materials to the air 
bag cover panels, do not cover them or
The knee airbag supports the legs in a frontal
modify them in any way.
impact.
  Never modify either the individual compo 
Protective action nents or the wiring in the airbag system.
This also applies to steering wheel covers,
Airbags are not triggered in every impact situa 
the dashboard, the seats, the roof pillars
tion, e.g., in less severe accidents or rear-end
and the sides of the roofliner. 
collisions.
Even when you follow all instructions very
Information on how to ensure the optimal
closely, injury from contact with the airbags
protective effect of the airbags
cannot be ruled out in certain situations.
  Keep at a distance from the airbags.
The ignition and inflation noise may lead to
  Always grasp the steering wheel on the
short-term and, in most cases, temporary
steering wheel rim, holding your hands at
hearing impairment in sensitive individuals.
the 3 o'clock and 9 o'clock positions, to
Malfunction, deactivation and after de 
keep the risk of injury to your hands or
ploying the airbags
arms as low as possible when the airbag is
triggered. Do not touch the individual components imme 
diately after the system has been triggered;
  There should be no person, animals, or ob 
otherwise, you may risk burns.
jects between an airbag and a person.
Only have the airbags checked, repaired or dis 
  Do not use the cover of the front airbag on
mantled and the airbag generator scrapped by
the front passenger side as a storage area.
the service center or an authorized repair shop
  Dashboard and windshield on the front
for handling explosives.
passenger side must stay clear - do not at 
Non-professional attempts to service the sys 
tach adhesive labels or coverings and do
tem could lead to failure in an emergency or
not attach brackets or cables, e. g., for GPS
unintentional activation of the airbag - both
devices or' mobile phones.
may lead to injury. 
  Make sure that the front passenger is sit 
ting correctly, i.e., keeps his or her feet and Warnings and information on the airbags are
legs in the footwell; otherwise, leg injuries also found on the sun visors.
might occur when front airbag is activated.
Functional readiness of the airbag
  Do not place slip covers, seat cushions or
system
other objects on the front passenger seat
that are not approved specifically for seats With operating readiness turned on
with integrated side airbags. warning light in the instrument cluster
  Do not hang pieces of clothing, such as lights up briefly indicating airbag sys 
jackets, over the backrests. tem and belt tension are functional.
  Make sure that occupants keep their heads
away from the side airbag and do not rest Airbag system malfunctioning
against the head airbag; otherwise, injuries
  Warning lamp does not come on when op 
might occur when airbag is activated.
erating readiness is turned on.
  Do not remove the airbag system.
  The warning lamp lights up continuously.
  Do not remove the steering wheel.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 95
Safety Controls
In case of a malfunction have airbag sys    Do not attach covers, cushions, ball mats
tem checked immediately. or other items to the front passenger seat
unless they are specifically recommended
In case of a malfunction have airbag system
by your vehicle's manufacturer.
checked immediately; otherwise, there is a risk
that the system does not function as expected   Do not place any electronic devices on the
in case of a severe accident.  passenger seat if a child restraint system is
to be installed on it.
Automatic deactivation of the front-   Do not place objects under the seat that
seat passenger airbags could press against the seat from below.
The system reads if the front passenger seat is   No moisture in or on the seat.
occupied by measuring the human body's re 
sistance. Indicator lamp for the front-seat
passenger airbags
Front, knee and side airbag on the front pas 
senger's side are either activated or deacti 
vated.
Leave feet in the footwell
Make sure that the front passenger
keeps his or her feet in the footwell; otherwise,
proper functioning of the front passenger air 
bag might not be assured. 
Child restraint fixing system in the front
passenger seat The indicator lamp for the front-seat passen 
Before transporting a child on the front pas  ger airbags indicates the operating state of the
senger seat, refer to the safety notes and in  front-seat passenger airbags.
structions for children on the front passenger The lamp indicates whether the airbags are ei 
seat, see Children.  ther activated or deactivated.
  The indicator lamp lights up
Malfunction of the automatic
when a child is properly
deactivation system
seated in a child restraint fix 
When transporting older children and adults,
ing system or when the seat
the front-seat passenger airbags may be deac 
is empty. The airbags on the
tivated in certain sitting positions. In this case,
front passenger side are not
the indicator lamp for the front-seat passenger
activated.
airbags lights up.
  The indicator lamp does not light up when,
In this case, change the sitting position so that
e.g., a correctly seated person of sufficient
the front-seat passenger airbags are activated
size is detected on the seat. The airbags
and the indicator lamp goes out.
on the front passenger side are activated.
If it is not possible to activate the airbags, have
the person sit in the rear. Detected child seats
To enable correct recognition of the occupied The system generally detects children seated
seat cushion in a child seat, particularly in child seats re 
quired by NHTSA when the vehicle was manu 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 96
Controls Safety
factured. After installing a child seat, make Tire Pressure Monitor TPM
sure that the indicator lamp for the front-seat
passenger airbags lights up. This indicates The concept
that the child seat has been detected and the
The system monitors tire inflation pressure in
front-seat passenger airbags are not activated.
the four mounted tires. The system warns you
if there is a significant loss of pressure in one
Strength of the driver's and front-seat
or more tires. For this purpose, sensors in the
passenger airbag
tire valves measure the tire inflation pressure
The explosive power that activates driver's/
and tire temperature.
front passenger's airbags very much depends
on the positions of the driver's/front passeng  Hints
er's seat.
Tire damage due to external factors
With a respective message appearing on Con 
Sudden tire damage caused by external
trol Display calibrate the front seats to keep
circumstances cannot be recognized in ad 
the accuracy of this function over the longvance. 
term.
With use of the system observe further infor 
Calibrating the front seats
mation found under Tire inflation pressure, re 
A corresponding message appears on the fer to page 173.
Control Display.
Functional requirements
1. Press the reel and move the respective
The system must have been reset with the
seat all the way forward.
correct tire inflation pressure; otherwise, relia 
2. Press the reel forward again. The seat still
ble signaling of tire inflation pressure loss is
moves forward slightly.
not assured.
3. Readjust the seat to the desired position.
Reset the system after each adjustment of the
The calibration procedure is completed when tire inflation pressure and after every tire or
the message on the Control Display disap  wheel change.
pears.
Always use wheels with TPM electronics to
If the message continues to be displayed, re  ensure that the system will operate properly.
peat the calibration.
If the message does not disappear after a re  Status display
peat calibration, have the system checked as The current status of the Tire Pressure Moni 
soon as possible. tor TPM can be displayed on the Control Dis 
play, e.g., whether or not the TPM is active.
Unobstructed area of movement
On the Control Display:
Ensure that the area of movement of the
seats is unobstructed to avoid personal injury
1. "Vehicle info"
or damage to objects. 
2. "Vehicle status"
3. "Tire Pressure Monitor (TPM)"
The status is displayed.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 97
Safety Controls
Status control display 5. Reset tire inflation pressure:"Perform
reset".
Tire and system status are indicated by the
color of the wheels and a text message on the 6. Drive away.
Control Display.
The tires are shown in gray and the status is
displayed.
All wheels green
After driving faster than 19 mph/30 km/h for a
System is active and will issue a warning rela 
short period, the set tire inflation pressures are
tive to the tire inflation pressures stored during
accepted as reference values. The reset is
the last reset.
completed automatically while driving.
The progress of the reset is displayed.
One wheel is yellow
After a successfully completed Reset, the
A flat tire or major drop in inflation pressure in
wheels on the Control Display are shown in
the indicated tire.
green and "Tire Pressure Monitor (TPM)
active" is displayed.
All wheels are yellow
You may interrupt this trip at any time. When
A flat tire or major drop in inflation pressure in
you continue the reset resumes automatically.
several tires.
Low tire pressure message
Wheels, gray
The yellow warning lamp lights up. A
The system cannot detect a flat tire. Reasons
Check Control message is displayed.
for this may be:
  There is a flat tire or a major loss in
  The system is being reset.
tire inflation pressure.
  Malfunction.
  No reset was performed for the system.
The system therefore issues a warning
Status information
based on the tire inflation pressures before
The status control display additionally shows
the last reset.
the current tire inflation pressures and, de 
pending on the model, tire temperatures. It 1. Reduce your speed and stop cautiously.
shows the actual values read; they may vary Avoid sudden braking and steering maneu 
depending on driving style or weather condi  vers.
tions.
2. Identify the damaged wheel. Do so by
checking the tire inflation pressure using
Carry out reset
the Mobility System. To correct the tire in 
Reset the system after each adjustment of the flation pressure, refer to page 180.
tire inflation pressure and after every tire or
3. Repair flat tire with the Mobility System, re 
wheel change.
fer to page 178, or replace the damaged
On the Control Display and on the vehicle: wheel.
1. "Vehicle info" If a Mobility System is not available, contact
the service center.
2. "Vehicle status"
A low tire inflation pressure might turn on DSC
3. "Perform reset"
Dynamic Stability Control.
4. Switch on drive readiness - do not drive
off.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 98
Controls Safety
Required tire inflation pressure check   TPM was unable to complete the reset.
message Reset the system again.
A Check Control message is displayed in the   Interference through systems or devices
following situations with the same radio frequency: after leav 
ing the area of the interference, the system
  The system has detected a wheel change,
automatically becomes active again.
but no reset was done.
  Inflation was not carried out according to
Declaration according to NHTSA/
specifications.
FMVSS 138 Tire Pressure Monitoring
  The tire inflation pressure has fallen below System
the level of the last confirmation.
Each tire, including the spare (if provided)
In this case: should be checked monthly when cold and in 
  Check the tire pressure and correct as flated to the inflation pressure recommended
needed. by the vehicle manufacturer on the vehicle
placard or tire inflation pressure label. (If your
  Carry out a reset of the system after a tire
vehicle has tires of a different size than the size
change.
indicated on the vehicle placard or tire inflation
pressure label, you should determine the
System limits
proper tire inflation pressure for those tires.)
The system does not function properly if a re 
As an added safety feature, your vehicle has
set has not been carried out, e.g., a flat tire is
been equipped with a tire pressure monitoring
reported though tire inflation pressures are
system (TPMS) that illuminates a low tire pres 
correct.
sure telltale when one or more of your tires is
The tire inflation pressure depends on the significantly under-inflated. Accordingly, when
tire's temperature. Driving or exposure to the the low tire pressure telltale illuminates, you
sun will increase the tire's temperature, thus should stop and check your tires as soon as
increasing the tire inflation pressure. The tire possible, and inflate them to the proper pres 
inflation pressure is reduced when the tire sure. Driving on a significantly under-inflated
temperature falls again. These circumstances tire causes the tire to overheat and can lead to
may cause a warning when temperatures fall tire failure. Under-inflation also reduces fuel ef 
very sharply. ficiency and tire tread life, and may affect the
vehicle's handling and stopping ability. Please
Malfunction note that the TPMS is not a substitute for
proper tire maintenance, and it is the driver's
The yellow warning lamp flashes and
responsibility to maintain correct tire pressure,
then lights up continuously. A Check
even if under-inflation has not reached the
Control message is displayed. No flat
level to trigger illumination of the TPMS low
tire or loss of tire inflation pressure can be de 
tire pressure telltale. Your vehicle has also
tected.
been equipped with a TPMS malfunction indi 
Display in the following situations: cator to indicate when the system is not oper 
ating properly. The TPMS malfunction indica 
  A wheel without TPM electronics is fitted:
tor is combined with the low tire pressure
have the service center check it if needed.
telltale. When the system detects a malfunc 
  Malfunction: have the system checked by
tion, the telltale will flash for approximately one
your service center.
minute and then remain continuously illumi 
nated. This sequence will continue upon sub 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 99
Safety Controls
sequent vehicle start-ups as long as the mal  The status is displayed.
function exists. When the malfunction indicator
is illuminated, the system may not be able to Initialization
detect or signal low tire pressure as intended.
When initializing the once set inflation tire
TPMS malfunctions may occur for a variety of
pressures serve as reference values in order to
reasons, including the installation of replace 
detect a flat tire. Initialization is started by con 
ment or alternate tires or wheels on the vehicle
firming the tire inflation pressures.
that prevent the TPMS from functioning prop 
Do not initialize the system when driving with
erly. Always check the TPMS malfunction tell 
snow chains.
tale after replacing one or more tires or wheels
on your vehicle to ensure that the replacement On the Control Display:
or alternate tires and wheels allow the TPMS
1. "Vehicle info"
to continue to function properly.
2. "Vehicle status"
3. "Perform reset"
FTM Flat Tire Monitor
4. Switch on drive readiness - do not drive
off.
The concept
5. Start the initialization with "Perform reset".
The system detects tire inflation pressure loss
6. Drive away.
on the basis of rotation speed differences be 
The initialization is completed while driving,
tween the individual wheels while driving.
which can be interrupted at any time.
In the event of a tire inflation pressure loss, the
The initialization automatically continues when
diameter and therefore the rotational speed of
driving resumes.
the corresponding wheel changes. This will be
detected and reported as a flat tire.
Indication of a flat tire
The system does not measure the actual infla 
The yellow warning lamp lights up. A
tion pressure in the tires.
Check Control message is displayed.
Functional requirements There is a flat tire or a major loss in tire
inflation pressure.
The system must have been initialized when
the tire inflation pressure was correct; other 
1. Reduce your speed and stop cautiously.
wise, reliable flagging of a flat tire is not as 
Avoid sudden braking and steering maneu 
sured. Initialize the system after each correc 
vers.
tion of the tire inflation pressure and after
2. Identify the damaged wheel. Do so by
every tire or wheel change.
checking the tire inflation pressure using
Status display the Mobility System. If the tire inflation
pressure in all tires is correct, the Flat Tire
The current status of the Flat Tire Monitor can
Monitor may not have been initialized. In
be displayed on the Control Display, e.g.,
this case, initialize the system.
whether or not the FTM is active.
3. Repair flat tire with the Mobility System, re 
On the Control Display:
fer to page 178, or replace the damaged
1. "Vehicle info" wheel.
2. "Vehicle status" If a Mobility System is not available, contact
the service center.
3. "Flat Tire Monitor (FTM)"

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 100
Controls Safety
When a flat tire is indicated, DSC Dynamic Sta  Adapting your speed and driving style
bility Control is switched on if needed.
The displays and warnings of the system
do not relieve the driver of the responsibility to
System limits
adapt his or her driving speed and style to the
Sudden tire damage traffic conditions. 
Sudden serious tire damage caused by
Be alert
external circumstances cannot be recognized
Due to system limitations, warnings may
in advance. 
be not issued at all, or may be issued late or
A natural, even tire inflation pressure loss in all improperly. Therefore, always be alert and
four tires will not be recognized. Therefore, ready to intervene; otherwise, there is the risk
check the tire inflation pressure regularly. of an accident. 
The system could be delayed or malfunction in
Tow-starting and towing
the following situations:
For tow-starting or towing, switch off the
  When the system has not been initialized.
Intelligent Safety systems; otherwise malfunc 
  When driving on a snowy or slippery road tions of the individual braking systems might
surface. lead to accidents. 
  Sporty driving style: spinning traction
wheels, high lateral acceleration (drifting). At a glance
  When driving with snow chains.
Button in the vehicle
Intelligent Safety
The concept
Intelligent Safety enables central operation of
the driver assistance system.
The intelligent safety systems can hel prevent
an imminent collision.
  Front-end collision warning with City Brak 
ing function, refer to page 101. Intelligent Safety button
  Pedestrian warning with City Braking func 
tion, refer to page 104.
Switching on/off
Hints Some Intelligent Safety systems are automati 
cally active after every departure. Some Intelli 
Personal responsibility
gent Safety systems activate according to the
The system does not serve as a substi  last setting.
tute for the driver's personal judgment of the
Press button briefly:
traffic situation.
  The menu for the intelligent safety
Be aware of the traffic situation and the vehi 
system is displayed. The systems
cle's surroundings at all times, otherwise acci 
are individually switched off ac 
dents are still possible despite all warnings. 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 101
Safety Controls
cording to their respective set  3 mph/5 km/h. Time of warnings may vary with
tings. the current driving situation.
  LED lights up orange or goes out respec  Appropriate braking kicks in at speeds of up to
tive to their individual settings. 35 mph/60 km/h.
Adjust as needed. Individual settings are
Detection range
stored for the profile currently in use.
Press button again:
  All Intelligent Safety systems are
activated.
  The LED lights up green.
Hold down button:
  All Intelligent Safety systems are
turned off.
It responds to objects if they are detected by
  The LED goes out.
the system.
Hints
Front-end collision warning
with City Braking function Personal responsibility
The system does not serve as a substi 
The concept tute for the driver's personal judgment of the
traffic situation.
The ystem can help prevent accidents. If an
accident cannot be prevented, the system will Be aware of the traffic situation and the vehi 
help reduce the collision speed. cle's surroundings at all times, otherwise acci 
dents are still possible despite all warnings. 
The system sounds a warning before an immi 
nent collision and actuates brakes independ 
Adapting your speed and driving style
ently if needed.
The displays and warnings of the system
The automatic braking intervention is done
do not relieve the driver of the responsibility to
with limited force and duration.
adapt his or her driving speed and style to the
A camera in the area of the rearview mirror traffic conditions. 
controls the system.
Be alert
The front-end collision warning is available
even if cruise control has been deactivated. Due to system limitations, warnings may
be not issued at all, or may be issued late or
With the vehicle approaching another vehicle
improperly. Therefore, always be alert and
intentionally the collision warning is delayed
ready to intervene; otherwise, there is the risk
avoiding false alarm.
of an accident. 
General information
The system warns at two levels of an imminent
danger of collision at speeds from approx.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 102
Controls Safety
Tow-starting and towing Switching on/off manually
For tow-starting or towing, switch off the Press button briefly:
Intelligent Safety systems; otherwise malfunc 
  The menu for the intelligent safety
tions of the individual braking systems might
system is displayed. The systems
lead to accidents. 
are individually switched off ac 
cording to their respective set 
At a glance
tings.
  LED lights up orange or goes out respec 
Button in the vehicle
tive to their individual settings.
Adjust as needed. Individual settings are
stored for the profile currently in use.
Press button again:
  All Intelligent Safety systems are
activated.
  The LED lights up green.
Hold down button:
Intelligent Safety button
  All Intelligent Safety systems are
turned off.
  The LED goes out.
Camera
Setting the warning time
The warning time can be set via iDrive.
1. "Settings"
2. "Frontal Coll. Warning"
3. Activate the desired time on the Control
Display.
The selected time is stored for the profile cur 
The camera is found near the interior rearview rently in use.
mirror.
Warning with braking function
Keep the windshield in the area behind the in 
terior rearview mirror clean and clear.
Display
If a collision with a vehicle detected in this way
Switching on/off
is imminent, a warning symbol appears on the
instrument cluster.
Switching on automatically
The system is automatically active after every
driving-off.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 103
Safety Controls
The braking intervention can be interrupted by
Symbol Measure
stepping on the accelerator pedal or by ac 
The vehicle lights up red: prewarn  tively moving the steering wheel.
ing.
Object detection can be restricted. Limitations
Brake and increase distance. of the detection range and functional restric 
tions are to be considered.
The vehicle flashes red and an
acoustic signal sounds: acute warn 
System limits
ing.
You are requested to intervene by
Detection range
braking or make an evasive maneu 
The system's detection potential is limited.
ver.
Thus a warning might not be issued or be is 
sued late.
Prewarning
E. g. the following situations may not be de 
This warning is issued, e.g., when there is the
tected:
impending danger of a collision or the distance
  Slow moving vehicles when you approach
to the vehicle ahead is too small.
them at high speed.
The driver must intervene actively when there
  Vehicles that suddenly swerve in front of
is a prewarning.
you, or sharply decelerating vehicles.
Acute warning with braking function   Vehicles with an unusual rear appearance.
Warning of the imminent danger of a collision   Two-wheeled vehicles ahead of you.
when the vehicle approaches another object at
a relatively high differential speed. Functional limitations
The driver must intervene actively when there The system may not be fully functional in the
is an acute warning. If necessary, the driver is following situations:
assisted by a minor automatic braking inter 
  In heavy fog, rain, sprayed water or snow 
vention in a possible risk of collision.
fall.
Acute warnings can also be triggered without
  In tight curves.
previous prewarning.
  If the driving stability control systems are
deactivated, e.g. DSC OFF.
Braking intervention
  If the field of view of the camera in the mir 
The warning prompts the driver himself/herself
ror is dirty or obscured.
to react. During a warning, the maximum brak 
  Up to 10 seconds after drive readiness is
ing force is used. Premise for the brake boos 
established.
ter is sufficiently quick and hard stepping on
the brake pedal. The system can assist with   During calibration of the camera immedi 
some braking intervention if there is risk of a ately after vehicle shipment.
collision. At low speeds vehicles may thus
  If there is constant blinding effects be 
come to a complete stop.
cause of oncoming light, e. g., from the sun
The braking intervention is executed only if low in the sky.
DSC Dynamic Stability Control is switched on.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 104
Controls Safety
Warning sensitivity   Central area, arrow 1, directly in front of the
vehicle.
The more sensitive the warning settings are,
e.g. the warning time, the more warnings are   Expanded area, arrow 2, to the right and
displayed. However, there may also be an ex  left.
cess of false warnings.
A collision is imminent if pedestrians are lo 
cated within the central area. A warning is is 
sued about pedestrians who are located within
Pedestrian warning with city
the extended area only if they are moving in
braking function the direction of the central area.
The concept
Hints
The ystem can help prevent accidents with pe 
Personal responsibility
destrians.
The system does not serve as a substi 
The system issues a warning in the city driving
tute for the driver's personal judgment of the
speed area if there is imminent danger of a col 
traffic situation.
lision with pedestrians and includes a braking
function. Be aware of the traffic situation and the vehi 
cle's surroundings at all times, otherwise acci 
The camera in the area of the rearview mirror
dents are still possible despite all warnings. 
controls the system.
Adapting your speed and driving style
General information
The displays and warnings of the system
In daylight the system warns of possible colli 
do not relieve the driver of the responsibility to
sions with pedestrians at speeds from about
adapt his or her driving speed and style to the
6 mph/10 km/h to about 35 mph/60 km/h
traffic conditions. 
shortly before a collision the system supports
you with a braking intervention. Be alert
Under those circumstances it reacts to people Due to system limitations, warnings may
who are within the detection range of the sys  be not issued at all, or may be issued late or
tem. improperly. Therefore, always be alert and
ready to intervene; otherwise, there is the risk
Detection range of an accident. 
Tow-starting and towing
For tow-starting or towing, switch off the
Intelligent Safety systems; otherwise malfunc 
tions of the individual braking systems might
lead to accidents. 
The detection area in front of the vehicle is div 
ided into two areas.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 105
Safety Controls
At a glance   LED lights up orange or goes out respec 
tive to their individual settings.
Button in the vehicle
Adjust as needed. Individual settings are
stored for the profile currently in use.
Press button again:
  All Intelligent Safety systems are
activated.
  The LED lights up green.
Hold down button:
  All Intelligent Safety systems are
Intelligent Safety button turned off.
  The LED goes out.
Camera
Warning with braking function
Display
If a collision with a person detected in this way
is imminent, a warning symbol appears on the
instrument cluster.
The red symbol is displayed and a sig 
nal sounds.
Intervene immediately by braking or make an
The camera is found near the interior rearview
evasive maneuver.
mirror.
Keep the windshield in the area behind the in  Braking intervention
terior rearview mirror clean and clear.
The warning prompts the driver himself/herself
to react. During a warning, the maximum brak 
Switching on/off ing force is used. Premise for the brake boos 
ter is sufficiently quick and hard stepping on
Switching on automatically the brake pedal. The system can assist with
some braking intervention if there is risk of a
The system is automatically active after every
collision. At low speeds vehicles may thus
driving-off.
come to a complete stop.
Switching on/off manually The braking intervention is executed only if
DSC Dynamic Stability Control is switched on.
Press button briefly:
The braking intervention can be interrupted by
  The menu for the intelligent safety
stepping on the accelerator pedal or by ac 
system is displayed. The systems
tively moving the steering wheel.
are individually switched off ac 
cording to their respective set 
tings.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 106
Controls Safety
Object detection can be restricted. Limitations
of the detection range and functional restric 
tions are to be considered.
System limits
Detection range
The detection potential of the camera is lim 
ited.
Thus a warning might not be issued or be is 
sued late.
E. g. the following situations may not be de 
tected:
  Partially covered pedestrians.
  Pedestrians that are not detected as such
because of the viewing angle or contour.
  Pedestrians outside of the detection range.
  Pedestrians having a body size less than
32 in/80 cm.
Functional limitations
The system may not be fully functional or may
not be available in the following situations:
  In heavy fog, rain, sprayed water or snow 
fall.
  In tight curves.
  If the driving stability control systems are
deactivated, e.g. DSC OFF.
  If the camera viewing field or the front
windshield are dirty or covered.
  Up to 10 seconds after drive readiness is
established.
  During calibration of the camera immedi 
ately after vehicle shipment.
  If there is constant blinding effects be 
cause of oncoming light, e. g., from the sun
low in the sky.
  When it is dark outside.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 107
Driving stability control systems Controls
Driving stability control systems
Vehicle features and options Always be ready to apply the brake
Always be ready to apply the brake, be 
This chapter describes all standard, countrycause without energy recovery there is also no
specific and optional features offered with the
braking action through the electric drive unit.
series. It also describes features that are not
The vehicle could roll further than anticipated.
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
This may constitute a danger for other traffic. 
the selected options or country versions. This
also applies to safety-related functions and
systems. The respectively applicable country
provisions must be observed when using the DSC Dynamic Stability
respective features and systems. Control
The concept
Antilock Brake System ABS
DSC prevents traction loss in the power
ABS prevents locking of the wheels during wheels when driving off and accelerating.
braking.
DSC also recognizes unstable vehicle condi 
The vehicle contains its steering power even tions such as fishtailing or nose-diving. Within
during full brake applications, thus increasing the physical limits DSC helps to keep the vehi 
active safety. cle on a steady course by reducing engine
speed and by applying brakes to the individual
ABS is ready when car is ready to drive.
wheels.
Brake assistant Note
Adjust your driving style to the situation
When you apply the brakes rapidly, this system
An appropriate driving style is always the
automatically produces the greatest possible
responsibility of the driver.
braking force boost. It reduces the braking dis 
tance to a minimum during emergency stop. The laws of physics cannot be repealed, not
This system utilizes all of the benefits provided even with DSC.
by ABS.
Therefore, do not reduce the additional safety
Do not reduce the pressure on the brake pedal margin by driving in a risky manner. 
for the duration of the emergency stop.
Do not deactivate DSC when driving with
roof load
Energy recovery Do not deactivate Dynamic Stability Control
DSC when driving with roof load, e.g. roofIn the event of danger, such as with locked
mounted luggage rack.
wheels, energy recovery is reduced in order to
Otherwise, driving safety is not given in driv 
prevent unstable driving situations.
ing-critical situation due to the elevated center
of gravity. 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 108
Controls Driving stability control systems
Indicator/warning lights Deactivating DTC
The indicator lamp flashes: DSC con  1. "Settings"
trols the drive and braking forces. 2. "Traction control"
The indicator lamp lights up: DSC has 3. "Normal"
failed.
TRACTION and the DSC OFF indicator
lamp go out.
When drive readiness is switched on, DTC is
DTC Dynamic Traction
automatically deactivated.
Control
Driving Dynamics Control
The concept
The DTC system is a version of the DSC where
The concept
forward momentum is optimized.
The Driving Dynamics Control helps to fineThe system ensures maximum headway on
tune the vehicle's settings and features. Vari 
special road conditions or loose road surfaces,
ous programs can be selected for this purpose.
e.g., unplowed snowy roads, but with some 
what limited driving stability.
Overview
Activating the Dynamic Traction Control DTC
provides maximum traction. Driving stability is
Button in the vehicle
limited during acceleration and when driving in
curves.
Therefore drive with appropriate caution.
You may find it useful to briefly activate DTC
under the following special circumstances:
  When driving in slush or on uncleared,
snow-covered roads.
  When freeing vehicle from deep snow or
driving off from loose grounds.
  When driving with snow chains.
Operating the programs
Deactivating/activating DTC Dynamic
Driving Dynamics Control Program
Traction Control
COMFORT
Activating DTC
ECO PRO
1. "Settings"
ECO PRO+
2. "Traction control"
3. "TRACTION"
TRACTION and the DSC OFF indicator
COMFORT
lamp lights up.
For balanced tuning.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 109
Driving stability control systems Controls
Activating COMFORT Displays
Press button repeatedly until COM 
Program selection
FORT is displayed in the instrument
cluster. Pressing the button displays a
list of the selectable programs.
Depending on your vehicle's op 
ECO PRO
tional features, the list in the in 
ECO PRO, refer to page 155, provides consis 
strument cluster can differ from
tent tuning to maximize range.
the illustration shown.
Comfort functions and the engine controller
are adjusted.
Selected program
The program can be configured to individual
The ECO PRO and ECO PRO+ driving pro 
specifications.
grams are shown in the instrument cluster. In
addition, the display on the automatic climate
Activating ECO PRO
control lights up
Press button repeatedly until ECO
PRO is displayed in the instrument Display on the Control Display
cluster.
Program changes can be displayed on the
Control Display.
Configuring ECO PRO
1. "Settings"
1. Activate ECO PRO.
2. "Control display"
2. "Configure ECO PRO"
3. "Driving mode info"
Make the desired settings.
ECO PRO+ Drive-off assistant
ECO PRO+, refer to page 155, also limits the
This system supports driving off on inclines.
maximum speed and reduces climate control
The parking brake is not required.
and lighting functions.
1. Hold the vehicle in place with the foot
Comfort functions and the engine controller
brake.
are adjusted.
2. Release the foot brake and drive off with 
Activating ECO PRO+ out delay.
Press button repeatedly until ECO After the foot brake is released, the vehicle is
PRO+ is displayed in the instrument held in place for approx. 2 seconds.
cluster. Depending on the vehicle load, the vehicle may
roll back slightly.
Driving off without delay
After releasing the foot brake, start driv 
ing without delay, since the drive-off assistant
will not hold the vehicle in place for more than
approx. 2 seconds and the vehicle will begin to
roll back. 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 110
Controls Driving comfort
Driving comfort
Vehicle features and options to reactivate the system. The vehicle will auto 
matically accelerate.
This chapter describes all standard, countryAs soon as the road is clear, the vehicle accel 
specific and optional features offered with the
erates to the desired speed.
series. It also describes features that are not
The speed is also maintained downhill, but
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
may not be maintained uphill if engine power is
the selected options or country versions. This
insufficient.
also applies to safety-related functions and
systems. The respectively applicable country
General information
provisions must be observed when using the
respective features and systems. Depending on the driving settings, the features
of the cruise control can change in certain
areas.
Camera-based cruise control
with Stop & Go function, Hints
ACC Personal responsibility
Even an active system holds the driver
The concept
responsible for his or her driving, particularly
Use this system to select a desired speed that for staying in your lane, adjusting your speed,
the vehicle will maintain automatically on clear keeping your distance and for your driving
roads. style all in relation to traffic.
To the extent possible, the system automati  Technically the system has its limits, it cannot
cally adjusts the speed to a slower vehicle independently react to all traffic situations.
ahead of you. Monitor your driving, be on the alert, observe
A camera on the interior rear view mirror is the vehicle surroundings and other traffic and
used to detect vehicles driving ahead. react when needed, e.g. through braking,
steering or make evasive maneuvers - risk of
The distance that the vehicle maintains to the
accident. 
vehicle ahead of you can be varied.
For safety reasons, it depends on the speed. Unfavorable weather conditions
To maintain a certain distance, the system au  In the event of unfavorable weather and
tomatically reduces the speed, applies the light conditions, e. g. if there is rain, snowfall,
brakes lightly, or accelerates again if the vehi  slush, fog or glare, this may result in poorer
cle ahead begins moving faster. recognition of vehicles as well as short-term
If the vehicle ahead of you brakes to a halt, and interruptions for vehicles that are already de 
then proceeds to drive again within a brief pe  tected. Drive attentively, and react to the cur 
riod, the system is able to detect this within the rent traffic situation. Intervene actively when
given system limits. Your own vehicle will necessary, e.g., by braking, steering or making
brake automatically and then accelerate again. an evasive maneuver, otherwise, there is the
risk of an accident. 
If the vehicle ahead of you drives away again
after a prolonged period, briefly press the ac 
celerator pedal or press the appropriate button

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 111
Driving comfort Controls
Before leaving the vehicle, secure it Keep the windshield in the area behind the in 
against moving on its own. terior rearview mirror clean and clear.
Before leaving the vehicle, set the parking A dirty or covered area in front of the interior
brake and reel off drive readiness. Otherwise, mirror may hinder the detection of vehicles.
the vehicle may begin to move. 
If necessary, clean the area in front of the inte 
rior mirror, e.g., carefully remove salt residue in
At a glance the winter.
Buttons on the steering wheel
Switching on/off and interrupting
cruise control
Press but  Function
ton
Switching on
Cruise control on/off, interrupt 
Press button on the steering wheel.
ing, refer to page 111.
Store/maintain speed, refer to The indicator lamp in the instrument
page 112. cluster lights up.
Resume speed, refer to
Desired speed becomes current speed
page 113.
and will be displayed - beside the sym 
Adjust distance, refer to bol - in the Info Display.
page 113.
Cruise control can be used.
rocker switch:
Switch off
Maintain, store, change speed,
refer to page 112.
Deactivated or interrupted system
With deactivated or interrupted system
Buttons are arranged according to vehicle's use your brakes, steering and moves as usual
series, optional features and country specifica  to avoid the chance of an accident. 
tions.
To switch off the system while standing, step
on brake pedal at the same time.
Camera
Press button on the steering wheel.
  If active: press twice.
  If interrupted: press once.
The displays go out. The stored desired speed
is deleted.
Interrupting
Press button on the steering wheel.
The camera is found near the interior rearview
mirror.
If interrupting the system while stationary,
press on the brake pedal at the same time.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 112
Controls Driving comfort
The system is automatically interrupted in the
following situations:
  When the brakes are applied.
  When selector lever position D is disen 
gaged.
  When Dynamic Traction Control DTC is
activated.
  When DSC is actively controlling stability.
  If the safety belt and the driver's door are Press the rocker switch while the system is in 
opened while the vehicle is standing still. terrupted.
  If the detection range of the camera is im 
When the system is switched on, the current
paired, e.g., by soiling, heavy precipitation
speed is maintained and stored as the desired
or glare effects from the sun.
speed.
This is displayed in the speedometer and con 
Maintaining, storing, and changing the
tinuously in the instrument cluster. Displays in
speed
the instrument cluster, refer to page 113.
Hints When cruise control is maintained or stored,
DSC Dynamic Stability Control will be turned
Adjusting the desired speed
on if needed.
Modify desired speed to road conditions
and be ready to brake at all times; otherwise, Changing the speed
there is the risk of an accident. 
Press the rocker switch up or down repeatedly
until the desired speed is set.
Differences in speed
If active, the displayed speed is stored and the
Large differences in speed relative to
vehicle reaches the stored speed when the
other vehicles cannot be compensated by the
road is clear.
system such as in the following situations:
  Each time the rocker switch is pressed to
  When fast approaching a slowly moving
the point of resistance, the desired speed
vehicle.
increases or decreases by approx.
  When another vehicle suddenly swerves
1 mph/1 km/h.
into the wrong lane.
  Each time the rocker switch is pressed
  When stationary objects are approached at
past the point of resistance, the desired
high speed. 
speed increases or decreases by a maxi 
mum of 5 mph/10 km/h.
Maintaining/storing the speed
Hold the rocker switch in position to repeat the
Press button.
action.
Or:

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 113
Driving comfort Controls
Distance To accelerate to the desired speed auto 
matically, briefly press the accelerator or
Select a distance
press the RES or SET button.
Adjust the distance according to the traf 
Flashing bar in the distance display indicates
fic and weather conditions; otherwise, there is
that the vehicle in the camera detection range
the risk of an accident. Maintain the prescribed
has moved away.
safety distance. 
Your vehicle was brought down to a halt
through stepping on the brake pedal and it is
Adjust distance
standing behind another vehicle:
Press button repeatedly until the de 
sired distance is set.
1. Press button to call up a stored
desired speed.
The set distance is briefly displayed in
2. Release the brake pedal.
the left part of the instrument cluster.
3. Step on the accelerator briefly, or press the
RES rocker switch when the vehicle ahead
Calling up the desired speed and
of you drives away.
distance
Changing between cruise control with/
While driving
without distance control
Press button with the system
Traffic ahead
switched on.
The cruise control does not react to traf 
Desired speed and distance are then contin 
fic driving ahead of you, but instead maintains
ued with these settings. The instrument clus 
the stored speed. Take this factor into account
ter briefly displays the selected distance.
- you yourself must react; otherwise, there is
the risk of an accident. 
In the following cases, the stored speed value
is deleted and cannot be called up again:
To reel over to cruise control:
  When the system is switched off.
Press and hold this button.
  When drive readiness is switched off.
The indicator lamp in the instrument
While standing
cluster comes on and check-control
The system brought the vehicle to a complete
message is displayed as soon as the
standstill:
reel is made to cruise control.
In order to reel back to Active Cruise Control,
  Green indicator in the info display:
press the button again briefly.
Your vehicle accelerates automatically as
soon as the vehicle in the camera's range Displays in the instrument cluster
moves off.
Desired speed
  Indicator in the info display The desired speed is displayed next to
switches to orange: no automatic driving the symbol in the info display.
off.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 114
Controls Driving comfort
  The indicator lights up green: the system is A vehicle has been detected ahead of you.
active.
The vehicle symbol flashes orange:
  The indicator lights up orange: the system
has been interrupted. The conditions are not adequate for
the system to work.
  No display: system is switched off.
The system was deactivated but applies the
brakes until you actively resume control by
Status display
pressing on the brake pedal or accelerator
Selected desired speed. pedal.
The vehicle symbol flashes red and an
If --- appears briefly on the display for Check acoustic signal sounds:
Control messages, it is possible that the sys 
You are requested to intervene by
tem requirements are currently not ready for
braking or make an evasive maneuver.
operations.
The system has been interrupted or
Distance to vehicle ahead of you
distance control is deactivated be 
Selected distance from the vehicle driving cause the accelerator pedal is being
ahead is briefly displayed in the left hand por  pressed; a vehicle was not detected.
tion of the instrument cluster.
Distance control is deactivated be 
Distance display
cause the accelerator pedal is being
pressed; a vehicle was detected.
Distance 1
Flashing bar: the detected vehicle has
driven away.
Distance 2
ACC is no longer accelerating. To ac 
celerate further, activate ACC by stepping on
Distance 3 the accelerator pedal, pressing the RES button
or rocker switch.
Distance 4
Changing between cruise control with/
This value is set after the system is without distance control
switched on.
Display in the instrument cluster:
Cruise Control without distance con 
Indicator/warning lights
trol.
Personal responsibility
Active Cruise Control with distance
The indicator and warning lights do not
control.
relieve the driver of the responsibility to adapt
his or her desired driving speed and style to
the traffic conditions. 
The vehicle symbol lights up orange:

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 115
Driving comfort Controls
System limits Swerving vehicles
Speed range
The system is best used on well-constructed
roads.
The desired speed can be set between
20 mph/30 km/h and 85 mph/140 km/h.
The system can also be activated when sta 
tionary.
Comply with the legal speed limit in every sit 
A vehicle driving in front of you is not detected
uation when using the system.
until it is completely within the same lane as
your vehicle.
Detection range
Swerving vehicles
If a vehicle driving ahead of you suddenly
swerves into your lane, the system may not be
able to automatically restore the selected dis 
tance. This also applies to major speed differ 
ences to vehicles driving ahead of you, e.g.,
when rapidly approaching a truck. When a ve 
hicle driving ahead of you is reliably detected,
the system requests that the driver intervene
The detection lidacity of the system and the by braking and carrying out evasive maneu 
automatic braking lidacity are limited. vers, if needed. You must react yourself; other 
Two-wheeled vehicles for instance might not wise, there is the risk of an accident. 
be detected.
Cornering
Limited detection potential
Because of the limited possible detec 
tion, you should be alert at all times so that you
can intervene if needed; otherwise, there is the
risk of an accident. 
Deceleration
The system does not decelerate for:
  Pedestrians, cyclists or similar slow road
users. If the desired speed is too high for a curve, the
speed is reduced slightly, although curves can 
  Red traffic lights.
not be anticipated in advance. Therefore, drive
  Cross traffic.
into a curve at an appropriate speed.
  Oncoming traffic.
In tight curves the system offers only restricted
  Unlit vehicles or vehicles with defective detection where a vehicle ahead of you might
lighting at night. be detected late or not at all.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 116
Controls Driving comfort
Cruise control
The concept
The system maintains a preset speed via the
buttons on the steering wheel. The system
brakes on downhill gradients if engine braking
is insufficient.
General information
When you approach a curve the system may
Depending on the driving settings, the features
briefly report vehicles in the next lane due to
of the cruise control can change in certain
the bend of the curve. If the system deceler 
areas.
ates you may compensate it by briefly acceler 
ating.
Hints
After releasing the gas pedal the system is re 
Unfavorable conditions
activated and controls speed independently.
Do not use the system if unfavorable
conditions make it impossible to drive at a con 
Driving away
stant speed, e.g.:
In some situations, the vehicle cannot drive off
  On winding roads.
automatically; for example:
  In heavy traffic.
  On steep inclines.
  On slippery roads, in fog, snow or rain, or
  From behind bumps in the road.
on a loose road surface.
In these cases, step on the accelerator pedal.
Otherwise, you could lose control of the vehi 
cle and cause an accident. 
Malfunction
A Check Control message is displayed if the
Overview
system fails.
The system may not be fully functional in the Buttons on the steering wheel
following situations:
  When an object was not correctly de  Press button Function
tected.
System on/off, interrupt
  In heavy fog, rain, sprayed water or snow 
fall.
Store speed
  In tight curves.
  If the camera viewing field or the front
Resume speed
windshield are dirty or covered.
  When driving toward bright lights.
rocker switch: change, hold,
  Up to 20 seconds after drive readiness is
store speed
switched on via the Start/Stop knob.
  During calibration of the camera immedi 
ately after vehicle shipment.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 117
Driving comfort Controls
Controls Maintaining, storing, and changing the
speed
Switching on
Hints
Press button on the steering wheel.
Adjusting the desired speed
The indicator lamp in the instrument Modify desired speed to road conditions
cluster lights up. and be ready to brake at all times; otherwise,
there is the risk of an accident. 
Desired speed becomes current speed
and will be displayed - beside the sym  Maintaining/storing the speed
bol - in the Info Display.
Press button.
Cruise control can be used. Or:
Switch off
Deactivated or interrupted system
With deactivated or interrupted system
use your brakes, steering and moves as usual
to avoid the chance of an accident. 
Press button.
  If active: press twice.
Press the rocker switch while the system is in 
  If interrupted: press once.
terrupted.
The displays go out. The stored desired speed
is deleted. When the system is switched on, the current
speed is maintained and stored as the desired
Interrupting speed.
This is displayed in the instrument cluster.
When active, press the button.
When cruise control is maintained or stored,
The system is automatically interrupted if: DSC Dynamic Stability Control will be turned
on if needed.
  The brakes are applied.
  Selector lever position D is disengaged.
Changing the speed
  DTC Dynamic Traction Control is acti 
Press the rocker switch up or down repeatedly
vated.
until the desired speed is set.
  DSC is actively controlling stability.
If active, the displayed speed is stored and the
vehicle reaches the stored speed when the
road is clear.
  Each time the rocker switch is pressed to
the point of resistance, the desired speed
increases or decreases by approx.
1 mph/1 km/h.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 118
Controls Driving comfort
  Each time the rocker switch is pressed If --- appears briefly on the display for Check
past the point of resistance, the desired Control messages, it is possible that the sys 
speed increases or decreases by a maxi  tem requirements are currently not ready for
mum of 5 mph/10 km/h. operations.
The maximum speed that can be set de 
pends on the vehicle.
PDC Park Distance Control
  Pressing the rocker switch to the resist 
ance point and holding it accelerates or de 
The concept
celerates the vehicle without requiring
pressure on the accelerator pedal. PDC is a support when parking. When you
slowly approach an object in the rear - or also
After the rocker switch is released, the ve 
in the front of the vehicle if the feature is availa 
hicle maintains its final speed. Pressing the
ble - then the object is reported through:
switch beyond the resistance point causes
the vehicle to accelerate more rapidly.   Signal tones.
  Visual display.
Resuming the desired speed
General information
Press button.
Ultrasound sensors in the bumpers measure
the distances from objects.
The stored speed is reached and maintained.
The maneuvering range, depending on the ob 
Displays in the instrument cluster stacle and environmental conditions, is approx.
6 ft/2 m.
Indicator lamp
An acoustic warning is first given:
Depending on how the vehicle is equip    By the front sensors and the two rear cor 
ped, the indicator lamp in the instru  ner sensors at approx. 24 in/60 cm.
ment cluster indicates whether the sys 
  By the rear middle sensors at approx.
tem is switched on.
5 ft/1.50 m.
To ensure full functionality:
Desired speed
  Do not cover sensors, e.g., with stickers,
The desired speed is displayed next to bicycle racks.
the symbol in the info display.
  Keep the sensors clean and free of ice.
  The indicator lights up green: the
  When using high-pressure washers, do not
system is active.
spray the sensors for long periods and
  The indicator lights up orange: the system maintain a distance of at least 12 in/30 cm.
has been interrupted.
Hints
  No display: system is switched off.
Personal responsibility
Status display Even an active system does not relieve
the driver from personal responsibility while
Selected desired speed.
driving.
Technically the system has its limits, it cannot
independently react to all traffic situations.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 119
Driving comfort Controls
Monitor your driving, be on the alert, observe Settings are stored for the profile currently
the vehicle surroundings and other traffic and in use.
react when needed - risk of accident. 
Automatic deactivation during forward
Avoid driving fast with PDC
travel
Avoid approaching an object too fast.
The system switches off when a certain driving
Avoid driving off fast while PDC is not yet ac  distance or speed is exceeded.
tive.
Switch the system back on if needed.
For technical reasons, the system may other 
wise be too late in issuing a warning.  With front PDC: switching on/off
manually
Overview
Press button.
With front PDC: button in vehicle
  On: the LED lights up.
  Off: the LED goes out.
The rearview camera image is displayed when
the reverse gear is engaged by pressing the
button.
Display
Signal tones
When approaching an object, an intermittent
PDC Park Distance Control sound indicates the position of the object. E. g.
if an object is detected to the left rear of the
vehicle, a signal tone sounds from the left rear
Switching on/off
speaker.
The shorter the distance to the object, the
Switching on automatically
shorter the intervals.
PDC switches on automatically in the following
If the distance to a detected object is less than
situations:
approx. 10 in/25 cm, a continuous tone is
  If selector lever position R is engaged while
sounded.
drive readiness is switched on.
With front PDC: if objects are located both in
The rearview camera also switches on.
front of and behind the vehicle, an alternating
  If equipped with front PDC: when obsta  continuous signal is sounded.
cles are detected behind or in front of the
The signal tone is switched off, when selector
vehicle by PDC and the speed is slower
lever position P is engaged.
than approx. 2.5 mph/4 km/h.
You may turn off automatic activation: Volume
The volume of the PDC signal tone can be ad 
1. "Settings"
justed similar to the sound and volume set 
2. "Parking"
tings of the radio.
3. Select setting.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 120
Controls Driving comfort
Settings are stored for the profile currently in   For objects with porous surfaces.
use.
Low objects already displayed, e.g., curbs, can
move into the blind area of the sensors before
Visual warning
or after a continuous tone sounds.
The approach of the vehicle to an object can
be shown on the Control Display. Objects that False warnings
are farther away are already displayed on the
PDC may issue a warning under the following
Control Display before a signal sounds.
conditions even though there is no obstacle
A display appears as soon as Park Distance within the detection range:
Control (PDC) is activated.
  In heavy rain.
The range of the sensors is represented in the
  When sensors are very dirty or covered
colors green, yellow and red.
with ice.
When the image of the rearview camera is dis 
  When sensors are covered in snow.
played, the reel can be made to PDC:
  On rough road surfaces.
"Rear view camera"
  On uneven surfaces, such as speed
bumps.
System limits
  In large buildings with right angles and
Limits of ultrasonic measurement smooth walls, e.g., in underground ga 
rages.
Ultrasonic measuring might not function under
the following circumstances:   In automatic car washes.
  For small children and animals.   Through heavy pollution.
  For persons with certain clothing, e.g.   Due to other ultrasound sources, e.g.,
coats. sweeping machines, high pressure steam
cleaners or neon lights.
  With external interference of the ultra 
sound, e.g. from passing vehicles or loud
Malfunction
machines.
A Check Control message is displayed.
  When sensors are dirty, iced over, dam 
aged or out of position. Red symbol is displayed, and the range
of the sensors is dimmed on the Con 
  Under certain weather conditions such as
trol Display.
high relative humidity, rain, snowfall, ex 
treme heat or strong wind.
PDC has failed. Have the system checked.
  With tow bars and trailer couplings of other
To ensure full functionality:
vehicles.
  Keep the sensors clean and free of ice.
  With thin or wedge-shaped objects.
  dimmedDo not put any stickers on sen 
  With moving objects.
sors.
  With elevated, protruding objects such as
  When using high-pressure washers, do not
ledges or cargo.
spray the sensors for long periods and
  With objects with corners and sharp edges. maintain a distance of at least 12 in/30 cm.
  With objects with a fine surface structure
such as fences.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 121
Driving comfort Controls
Rearview camera Clean the camera lens, refer to page 203.
The concept
Switching on/off
The rearview camera provides assistance in
parking and maneuvering backwards. The area Switching on automatically
behind the vehicle is shown on the Control
With drive readiness switched on, engage lever
Display.
in position P R.
Hints
Automatic deactivation during forward
travel
Check the traffic situation as well
The system switches off when a certain driving
Check the traffic situation around the ve 
distance or speed is exceeded.
hicle with your own eyes. Otherwise, an acci 
dent could result from road users or objects Switch the system back on if needed.
that are not lidtured by the camera. 
Switching on/off manually
At a glance
Press button.
Button in the vehicle
  On: the LED lights up.
  Off: the LED goes out.
The PDC is shown on the Control Display.
The rearview camera image is displayed when
the reverse gear is engaged by pressing the
button.
Switching the view via iDrive
With PDC activated:
"Rear view camera"
Rearview camera
The rearview camera image is displayed.
Camera Display on the Control Display
Functional requirement
  The rearview camera is switched on.
  The tailgate is fully closed.
Activating assistance functions
More than one assistance function can be ac 
tive at the same time.
  Parking aid lines
The camera lens is located underneath the tail 
"Parking aid lines"
gate. The image quality may be impaired by
dirt. Lanes and turning radius are indicated.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 122
Controls Driving comfort
  Obstacle marking Obstacle marking
"Obstacle marking"
Spatially-shaped markings are displayed.
Pathway lines
Obstacles behind the vehicle are detected by
the PDC sensors and, when respectively
equipped, detected by the rearview camera.
Obstacle markings can be faded into the image
of the rearview camera.
  Pathway lines can be superimposed on the
image of the rearview camera. Their colored margins match the markings of
the PDC. This simplifies estimation of the dis 
  They help you to estimate how much
tance to the object shown.
space is needed when parking and maneu 
vering on level pavement.
  They are dependent on the current steer  Parking using pathway and turning
ing angle and are continuously adjusted to radius lines
the steering wheel movements. 1. Position the vehicle so that the turning ra 
dius lines lead to within the limits of the
parking space.
Turning circle lines
  Turning circle lines can only be superim 
posed on the rearview camera image to 
gether with pathway lines.
  They show the course of the smallest pos 
sible turning radius on a level road.
  Only one turning radius line is displayed af 
ter the steering wheel is turned past a cer 
tain angle.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 123
Driving comfort Controls
2. Turn the steering wheel to the point where Parking assistant
the pathway line covers the corresponding
turning radius line. The concept
This system assists the driver in parking paral 
Display settings
lel to the road.
Brightness Ultrasound sensors measure parking spaces
on both sides of the vehicle.
With the rearview camera switched on:
The parking assistant calculates the best pos 
1. Select the symbol.
sible parking line and during the parking proce 
2. Turn the controller until the desired setting dure takes control of steering, the acceleration
is reached, and press the controller. and braking and if needed changes the gears.
Hold down the parking assistant button for the
Contrast duration of the parking procedure. At the end
of the parking procedure, the P selector lever
With the rearview camera switched on:
position is set.
1. Select the symbol.
When parking, also take note of the visual and
2. Turn the controller until the desired setting acoustic information and instructions issued
is reached, and press the controller. by the PDC, the parking assistant and the rear 
view camera and react accordingly.
System limits
A component of the parking assistant is the
PDC Park Distance Control, refer to page 118.
Detection of objects
Very low obstacles as well as high, protruding Hints
objects such as ledges may not be detected by
Personal responsibility
the system.
Even an active system does not relieve
Assistance functions also take into account
the driver from personal responsibility while
data of the PDC.
driving.
Follow instructions in the PDC chapter, refer to
Technically the system has its limits, it cannot
page 118.
independently react to all traffic situations.
The objects displayed on the Control Display
Monitor your driving, be on the alert, observe
under certain circumstances are closer than
the vehicle surroundings and other traffic and
they appear. Do not estimate the distance from
react when needed - risk of accident. 
the objects on the display.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 124
Controls Driving comfort
Changes to the parking space Overview
Changes to the parking space after it was
Button in the vehicle
measured are not taken into account by the
system.
Therefore, always be alert and ready to inter 
vene; otherwise, there is the risk of an acci 
dent. 
Transporting cargo
Cargo that extends beyond the perimeter
of the vehicle is not taken into account by the
system during the parking procedure.
Therefore, always be alert and ready to inter  Parking assistant
vene; otherwise, there is the risk of an acci 
dent. 
Ultrasound sensors
Curbs
The parking assistant may steer the vehi 
cle over or onto curb if need be.
Therefore, always be alert and ready to inter 
vene; otherwise, the wheels, tires, or the vehi 
cle may become damaged. 
Requirements
For measuring parking spaces
The ultrasound sensors for measuring parking
  Maximum speed while driving forward ap  spaces are located on the side of the vehicle.
prox. 22 mph/35 km/h.
To ensure full functionality:
  Maximum distance to row of parked vehi 
  Keep the sensors clean and free of ice.
cles: 5 ft/1.5 m.
  When using high-pressure washers, do not
spray the sensors for long periods and
Suitable parking space
maintain a distance of at least 12 in/30 cm.
  Gap between two objects with a minimum
  Do not put stickers over sensors.
length of approx. 5 ft/1.5 m.
  Min. length of gap between two objects:
your vehicle's length plus approx. Switching on/off
4 ft/1.2 m.
Switching on with the button
  Minimum depth: approx. 5 ft/1.5 m.
Press button.
Regarding the parking procedure
The LED lights up.
  Doors and tailgate closed.
The current status of the parking space search
  Parking brake released.
is indicated on the Control Display.
  Driver's safety belt fastened.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 125
Driving comfort Controls
Parking assistant is activated automatically. is active, suitable parking spaces are high 
lighted.
Switching on with selector lever
  The parking procedure is ac 
position R
tive. Steering control has
Engage selector lever position R. been taken over by system.
The current status of the parking space search
is indicated on the Control Display.
  Parking space search is always active
To activate: "Parking Assistant"
whenever the vehicle is moving forward
slow and straight, even if the system is de 
Switch off
activated. When the system is deactivated,
The system can be deactivated as follows:
the displays on the Control Display are
  Press button. shown in gray.
Parking using the parking assistant
Display on the Control Display
Check the traffic situation as well
System activated/deactivated Louds noises outside and inside the ve 
hicle can drown out the parking assistant's and
Symbol Meaning PDC's signals.
Check the traffic situation around the vehicle
Gray: the system is not available.
with your own eyes; otherwise, there is a dan 
White: the system is available but
ger of an accident. 
not activated.
1. Switch on the parking assistant and acti 
The system is activated.
vate it if needed.
The status of the parking space search is
System status indicated on the Control Display.
2. Follow the instructions on the Control Dis 
play.
The end of the parking procedure is indi 
cated on the Control Display.
3. Adjust the parking position yourself if
needed.
Interrupting manually
The parking assistant can be interrupted at any
  Colored symbols, see arrows, on the side
time:
of the vehicle illustrated. Parking assistant
  "Parking Assistant" Select the symbol
is activated and search for parking space
on the Control Display.
active.
  Press button.
  Control Display shows suitable parking
spaces at the edge of the road next to the
vehicle symbol. When the parking assistant

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 126
Controls Driving comfort
Interrupting automatically Functional limitations
The system is interrupted automatically in the The system may not be fully functional in the
following situations: following situations:
  If the driver grasps the steering wheel or if   On bumpy road surfaces such as gravel
he takes over steering. roads.
  Possible on snow-covered or slippery road   On slippery ground.
surfaces.
  On steep uphill or downhill grades.
  When there are obstacles that are hard to
  With accumulations of leaves/snow in the
overcome, such as curbs.
parking space.
  When there are obstacles that suddenly
arise. Limits of ultrasonic measurement
  If the Park Distance Control PDC displays Ultrasonic measuring might not function under
clearances that are too small. the following circumstances:
  If a maximum number of parking attempts   For small children and animals.
or the time taken for parking is exceeded.
  For persons with certain clothing, e.g.
  When switching to another function on the coats.
Control Display.
  With external interference of the ultra 
  When the button is released. sound, e.g. from passing vehicles or loud
machines.
  If the tailgate is open.
  When sensors are dirty, iced over, dam 
  If doors are open.
aged or out of position.
  When setting the parking brake.
  Under certain weather conditions such as
  During acceleration.
high relative humidity, rain, snowfall, ex 
  When braking. treme heat or strong wind.
  When unfastening the driver's safety belt.   With tow bars and trailer couplings of other
A Check Control message is displayed. vehicles.
  With thin or wedge-shaped objects.
Resume
  With moving objects.
An interrupted parking procedure can be con 
  With elevated, protruding objects such as
tinued if needed.
ledges or cargo.
Follow the instructions on the Control Display
  With objects with corners and sharp edges.
to do this.
  With objects with a fine surface structure
such as fences.
System limits
  For objects with porous surfaces.
No parking assistance
Low objects already displayed, e.g., curbs, can
The parking assistant does not offer assis  move into the blind area of the sensors before
tance in the following situations: or after a continuous tone sounds.
  In tight curves. The parking assistant may identify parking
spaces that are not suitable for parking.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 127
Driving comfort Controls
Malfunction
A Check Control message is displayed.
The parking assistant failed. Have the system
checked.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 128
Controls Climate control
Climate control
Vehicle features and options the selected options or country versions. This
also applies to safety-related functions and
This chapter describes all standard, countrysystems. The respectively applicable country
specific and optional features offered with the
provisions must be observed when using the
series. It also describes features that are not
respective features and systems.
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
Air conditioner
1 Seat heating, left 54 7 Remove ice and condensation
2 Cooling function 8 Rear window defroster
3 Temperature 9 Recirculated-air mode
4 Air distribution, windows 10 Seat heating, right 54
5 Air distribution, upper body region 11 Air flow
6 Air distribution, footwell

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 129
Climate control Controls
Hints   Footwell.
Sufficient ventilation
You may combine these programs as needed.
When remaining in the vehicle for an ex 
tended period of time, ensure sufficient exter 
Defrosts windows and removes
nal ventilation. Do not continuously use recir 
condensation
culated-air mode; otherwise the air quality in
the interior continuously deteriorates and win  Press button.
dow condensation increases. 
Ice and condensation are quickly re 
moved from the windshield and the front side
Climate control functions in detail windows.
Adjust air flow with the program active.
Cooling function
If the windows are fogged over, you can also
Cooling of the interior with the A/C button is
switch on the cooling function to dehumidify
only possible with drive readiness switched on.
the air.
Press button.
The air will be cooled and dehumidi  Rear window defroster
fied and, depending on the temperature set 
Press button.
ting, warmed again.
The rear window defroster switches
Depending on the weather, the windshield and off automatically after a certain period of time.
side windows may fog up briefly when drive
readiness is activated.
Recirculated-air mode
The air conditioner produces condensation
You may respond to unpleasant odors or pollu 
water, refer to page 151, that will exit from be 
tants in the immediate environment by tempo 
low the car.
rarily suspending the supply of outside air. The
system then recirculates the air currently
Temperature
within the vehicle.
Turn the ring to set the desired
Press button repeatedly to select an
temperature.
operating mode:
The air conditioner regulates
this temperature and then holds   LED off: outside air flows in continuously.
it constant.   LED on, recirculated-air mode: the supply
To reduce the energy consumption, the cool  of outside air into the vehicle is perma 
ing or heating output is reduced or deactivated nently blocked.
as per ECO-PRO mode, refer to page 155. Recirculated air mode switches off automati 
cally at low external temperatures after a cer 
tain amount of time in order to avoid window
Manual air distribution
fogging.
Press buttons repeatedly to select a program:
To prevent window fogging, recirculated air
  Windows.
mode switches off automatically after a certain
amount of time, depending on the environ 
  Upper body region. mental conditions.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 130
Controls Climate control
If the windows fog over, switch off recircu  Switching the system on/off
lated-air mode and increase the air flow, if
needed. Switch off
Sufficient ventilation Press and hold the left button until the
control switches off.
When remaining in the vehicle for an ex 
tended period of time, ensure sufficient exter 
nal ventilation. Do not continuously use recir  Switching on
culated-air mode; otherwise the air quality in
Press any button except
the interior continuously deteriorates and win 
  Rear window defroster.
dow condensation increases. 
  Seat heating.
Air flow, manual
Microfilter
Press the left or right side of the but 
In external and recirculated air mode the mi 
ton: decrease or increase air flow.
crofilter filters dust and pollen from the air.
The intensity is indicated through LEDs. The
This filter should be replaced during scheduled
highest level is active when five LEDs are lit.
maintenance, refer to page 188, of your vehi 
The air flow from the air conditioner may be re  cle.
duced automatically to save battery power.
Automatic climate control
1 Seat heating, left 54 3 Display
2 Cooling function 4 Temperature

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 131
Climate control Controls
5 Vent settings 10 Automatic recirculated-air control/recircu 
lated-air mode
6 AUTO program
11 Seat heating, right 54
7 Maximum cooling
12 Activated driving mode display 155
8 Remove ice and condensation
13 Air flow, AUTO intensity
9 Rear window defroster
Hints The selected temperature is shown on the dis 
play of the automatic climate control.
Sufficient ventilation
The automatic climate control reaches this
When remaining in the vehicle for an ex 
temperature as quickly as possible, if needed
tended period of time, ensure sufficient exter 
by increasing the cooling or heating output,
nal ventilation. Do not continuously use recir 
and then keeps it constant.
culated-air mode; otherwise the air quality in
the interior continuously deteriorates and win  Do not rapidly switch between different tem 
dow condensation increases.  perature settings. Otherwise, the automatic cli 
mate control will not have sufficient time to ad 
just the set temperature.
Climate control functions in detail
To reduce the energy consumption, the cool 
Cooling function ing or heating output is reduced or deactivated
as per ECO-PRO mode, refer to page 155.
The car's interior can be cooled with the sta 
tionary climate control or via the A/C button
Manual air distribution
with drive readiness activated.
Press button repeatedly to select a
Press button.
program:
The air will be cooled and dehumidi 
fied and, depending on the temperature set    Windows.
ting, warmed again.
  Upper body region.
Depending on the weather, the windshield and   Footwell.
side windows may fog up briefly when drive   Windows and upper body region.
readiness is activated.
  Windows and footwell.
The cooling function is switched on automati 
  Upper body region and footwell.
cally with the AUTO program.
  Windows, upper body region, and footwell.
When using the automatic climate control,
The selected air distribution is shown on the
condensation water, refer to page 151, devel 
display of the automatic climate control.
ops that exits underneath the vehicle.
If the windows are fogged over, press the
Temperature AUTO button to utilize the condensation sen 
sor.
Turn the ring to set the desired
temperature.
AUTO program
Press button.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 132
Controls Climate control
Air flow, air distribution and temperature are Ice and condensation are quickly removed
controlled automatically. from the windshield and the front side win 
dows.
Depending on the selected temperature,
For this purpose, point the side vents onto the
AUTO intensity program and outside influen 
side windows as needed.
ces, the air is directed to the windshield, side
windows, upper body, and into the footwell.
Adjust air flow with the program active.
The cooling function, refer to page 131, is
If the windows are fogged over, you can also
switched on automatically with the AUTO pro 
switch on the cooling function or press the
gram.
AUTO button to utilize the condensation sen 
At the same time, a condensation sensor con  sor.
trols the program so as to prevent window
condensation as much as possible. Rear window defroster
To switch off the program: press the button Press button.
again or manually adjust the air distribution.
The rear window defroster switches
off automatically after a certain period of time.
Intensity of the AUTO program
With the AUTO program activated, the auto 
Automatic recirculated-air control/
matic intensity control can be changed.
recirculated-air mode
Press the left or right side of the but 
You may respond to unpleasant odors or pollu 
ton: decrease or increase the inten 
tants in the immediate environment by tempo 
sity.
rarily suspending the supply of outside air. The
system then recirculates the air currently
The intensity level is indicated through LEDs.
within the vehicle.
Maximum cooling
Press button repeatedly to select an
operating mode:
Press button.
The system is set to the lowest tem    LEDs off: outside air flows in continuously.
perature, optimum air flow and air circulation
  Left LED on, automatic recirculated-air
mode.
control: a sensor detects pollutants in the
outside air and shuts off automatically.
Air flows out of the vents to the upper body re 
gion. The vents need to be open for this.   Right LED on, recirculated-air mode: the
supply of outside air into the vehicle is per 
The function is available above an external
manently blocked.
temperature of approx. 32  /0   and when
drive readiness is indicated. Recirculated air mode switches off automati 
cally at low external temperatures after a cer 
If ECO PRO+, refer to page 155, is activated,
tain amount of time in order to avoid window
this function is deactivated.
fogging.
Adjust air flow with the program active.
To prevent window fogging, recirculated air
mode switches off automatically after a certain
Defrosts windows and removes
amount of time, depending on the environ 
condensation
mental conditions.
Press button.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 133
Climate control Controls
If the windows are fogged over, switch off the Ventilation
recirculated-air mode and press the AUTO
button to utilize the condensation sensor.
Make sure that air can flow to the windshield.
Sufficient ventilation
When remaining in the vehicle for an ex 
tended period of time, ensure sufficient exter 
nal ventilation. Do not continuously use recir 
culated-air mode; otherwise the air quality in
the interior continuously deteriorates and win 
dow condensation increases. 
  Thumbwheels for opening and closing the
vents continuously, arrows 1.
Air flow, manual
  Lever for changing the air flow direction,
To manually adjust air flow turn off AUTO pro  arrow 2.
gram first.
Press the left or right side of the but  Adjusting the ventilation
ton: decrease or increase air flow.
  Ventilation for cooling:
The intensity is indicated through LEDs. The Direct vent in your direction when vehicle's
highest level is active when five LEDs are lit. interior is too hot.
The air flow of the automatic climate control   Draft-free ventilation:
may be reduced automatically to save battery Adjust the vent to let the air flow past you.
power.
Switching the system on/off Stationary climate control
Switch off
The concept
Press and hold the left button until the Stationary climate control cools or heats the
control switches off. interior prior to departure to a comfortable
temperature.
Switching on The interior temperature is lowered with high
cooling output.
Press any button except
The system may heat the interior. Snow and
  Rear window defroster.
ice can be removed more easily.
  Seat heating.
The air automatically exits through the vents to
the windshield, the side windows, the upper
Microfilter/activated-charcoal filter
body region and into the footwell.
In external and recirculated air mode the mi 
The stationary climate control can be switched
crofilter/activated charcoal filter filters dust,
on and off via the following systems:
pollen, and gaseous pollutants out of the air.
  Direct operation, refer to page 134.
This filter should be replaced during scheduled
maintenance, refer to page 188, of your vehi    Preselected departure times, refer to
cle. page 134.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 134
Controls Climate control
With the BMW i Remote App, refer to 4. "Precondition for departure time"
page 134, the standing air conditioning can be
5. Set and activate Desired departure time,
switched on.
refer to page 167.
The system switches off automatically after a
The symbol on the automatic climate con 
certain period of time.
trol lights up when the departure time is acti 
If stationary climate control is used during the vated.
charging process, less air conditioning ca 
The symbol on the automatic climate con 
pacity will be required while driving. This opti 
trol flashes when the stationary climate control
mizes the range.
has been switched on.
If drive readiness is switched off, changes can
Functional requirements
be made on the Control Display. Departure
  When the departure time is preselected:
time can only be changed once. Scheduled de 
depends on internal, external and set tem 
parture times are not adjusted. Settings for cli 
perature.
mate control and charging operation are also
  Direct operation via iDrive: any external applied for scheduled departure times.
temperature.
Activating with BMW i Remote App
  Charging cable connected or high-voltage
battery sufficiently charged. Using the BMW i Remote App, the system can
be directly switched on or via a preset depar 
  Drive readiness is deactivated.
ture time.
  The vents are open to allow air to flow out.
Switching on/off directly
On the Control Display:
1. "Settings"
2. "Climate"
3. "Activate comfort climate control"
The symbol on the automatic climate con 
trol flashes if the stationary climate control is
switched on.
Activate climate control at departure
time
The reel-on time is automatically determined
based on the temperature. The system
promptly switches on before the selected de 
parture time.
On the Control Display:
1. "Settings"
2. "Departure time"
3. "Departure 1:"

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 135
Interior equipment Controls
Interior equipment
Vehicle features and options Compatibility
If this symbol is printed on the packag 
This chapter describes all standard, countrying or in the instructions of the system
specific and optional features offered with the
to be controlled, the system is gener 
series. It also describes features that are not
ally compatible with the universal garage door
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
opener.
the selected options or country versions. This
also applies to safety-related functions and If you have any questions, please contact:
systems. The respectively applicable country
  Your service center.
provisions must be observed when using the
  www.homelink.com on the Internet.
respective features and systems.
HomeLink is a registered trademark of Gentex
Corporation.
Universal Integrated Remote
Control Control elements on the interior
rearview mirror
The concept
The universal garage door opener can operate
up to 3 functions of remote-controlled sys 
tems such as garage door drives or lighting
systems. The universal garage door opener re 
places up to 3 different hand-held transmitters.
To operate the remote control, the buttons on
the interior rearview mirror must be program 
med with the desired functions. The hand-held
transmitter for the particular system is required
  LED, arrow 1.
in order to program the remote control.
  Buttons, arrow 2.
During programming
  The hand-held transmitter, arrow 3, is re 
During programming and before activat 
quired for programming.
ing a device using the universal garage door
opener, ensure that there are no people, ani 
Programming
mals or objects in the area of the remote-con 
trolled device; otherwise, there is a risk of in 
General information
jury or damage.
1. Switch on the ignition.
Also follow the safety instructions of the handheld transmitter.  2. Initial setup:
Press and hold the left and right button on
Before selling the vehicle, delete the stored
the interior rearview mirror simultaneously
functions for the sake of security.
for approximately 20 seconds until the LED
on the interior rearview mirror flashes. This

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 136
Controls Interior equipment
erases all programming of the buttons on rearview mirror starts flashing rapidly and then
the interior rearview mirror. stays lit constantly for 2 seconds, the system
features an alternating-code system. Flashing
3. Hold the hand-held transmitter for the sys 
and continuous illumination of the LED will re 
tem to be controlled approx. 1 to 3 in/2.5 to
peat for approximately 20 seconds.
8 cm away from the buttons of the interior
rearview mirror. The required distance de  For systems with an alternating-code system,
pends on the manual transmitter. the universal garage door opener and the sys 
tem also have to be synchronized.
4. Simultaneously press and hold the button
of the desired function on the hand-held Please read the operating manual to find out
transmitter and the button to be program  how to synchronize the system.
med on the interior rearview mirror. The
Synchronizing is easier with the aid of a sec 
LED on the interior rearview mirror will be 
ond person.
gin flashing slowly.
To synchronize:
5. Release both buttons as soon as the LED
flashes more rapidly. The LED flashing 1. Park the vehicle within range of the re 
faster indicates that the button on the inte  mote-controlled system.
rior rearview mirror has been programmed. 2. Program the relevant button on the interior
If the LED does not flash faster after at rearview mirror as described.
least 60 seconds, change the distance be  3. Locate and press the synchronizing button
tween the interior rearview mirror and the on the system being programmed. You
hand-held transmitter and repeat the step. have approx. 30 seconds for the next step.
Several more attempts at different distan 
4. Hold down the programmed button on the
ces may be necessary. Wait at least
interior rearview mirror for approximately
15 seconds between attempts.
3 seconds and then release it. If necessary,
Canada: if programming with the hand- repeat this step up to three times in order
held transmitter was interrupted, hold to finish synchronization. Once synchroni 
down the interior rearview mirror button zation is complete, the programmed func 
and repeatedly press and release the tion will be carried out.
hand-held transmitter button for 2 sec 
onds. Reprogramming individual buttons
6. To program other functions on other but  1. Switch on the ignition.
tons, repeat steps 3 to 5.
2. Press and hold the interior rearview mirror
The systems can be controlled using the inte  button to be programmed.
rior rearview mirror buttons.
3. As soon as the interior rearview mirror LED
starts flashing slowly, hold the hand-held
Special feature of the alternatingtransmitter for the system to be controlled
code wireless system
approx. 1 to 3 in/2.5 to 8 cm away from the
If you are unable to operate the system after buttons of the interior rearview mirror. The
repeated programming, please check if the required distance depends on the manual
system to be controlled features an alternat  transmitter.
ing-code system.
Read the system's operating manual, or press
the programmed button on the interior rear 
view mirror longer. If the LED on the interior

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 137
Interior equipment Controls
4. Likewise, press and hold the button of the proximately 20 seconds until the LED flashes
desired function on the hand-held trans  rapidly. All stored functions are deleted. The
mitter. functions cannot be deleted individually.
5. Release both buttons as soon as the inte 
rior rearview mirror LED flashes more rap 
Digital compass
idly. The LED flashing faster indicates that
the button on the interior rearview mirror
has been programmed. The system can Overview
then be controlled by the button on the in 
terior rearview mirror.
If the LED does not flash faster after at
least 60 seconds, change the distance and
repeat the step. Several more attempts at
different distances may be necessary. Wait
at least 15 seconds between attempts.
Canada: if programming with the handheld transmitter was interrupted, hold
down the interior rearview mirror button 1 Control button
and repeatedly press and release the
2 Mirror display
hand-held transmitter button for 2 sec 
onds.
Mirror display
Controls The point of the compass is displayed in the
mirror when driving straight.
Before operation
Before operating a system using the uni 
Operating concept
versal garage door opener, ensure that there
Various functions can be called up by pressing
are no people, animals, or objects within the
the control button with a pointed object, such
range of movement of the remote-controlled
as the tip of a ballpoint pen or similar object.
system; otherwise, there is a risk of injury or
The following setting options are displayed in
damage.
succession, depending on how long the con 
Also follow the safety instructions of the handtrol button is pressed:
held transmitter. 
  Pressed briefly: turns display on/off.
The system, such as the garage door, can be
  3 to 6 seconds: compass zone setting.
operated using the button on the interior rear 
  6 to 9 seconds: compass calibration.
view mirror while the engine is running or when
the ignition is started. To do this, hold down   9 to 12 seconds: left/right-hand steering
the button within receiving range of the system setting.
until the function is activated. The interior rear 
  12 to 15 seconds: language setting.
view mirror LED stays lit while the wireless sig 
nal is being transmitted.
Setting the compass zones
Sets the particular compass zones on the vehi 
Deleting stored functions
cle so that the compass operates correctly; re 
Press and hold the left and right button on the
fer to World map with compass zones.
interior rearview mirror simultaneously for ap 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 138
Controls Interior equipment
World map with magnetic zones
Procedure Procedure
1. Press and hold the control button for ap  1. Make sure that there are no large metallic
prox. 3 to 4 seconds. The number of the objects or overhead power lines near the
set compass zone appears in the mirror. vehicle and that there is sufficient room to
drive around in a circle.
2. To change the zone setting, press the con 
trol button quickly and repeatedly until the 2. Set the currently applicable compass zone.
number of the compass zone that corre 
3. Press and hold the control button for ap 
sponds with your location appears in the
prox. 6 to 7 seconds so that "C" appears
mirror.
on the display. Next, drive in a complete
The set zone is stored automatically. The com  circle at least once at a speed of no more
pass is ready for use again after approximately than 4 mph/7 km/h. If calibration is suc 
10 seconds. cessful, the "C" is replaced by the points of
the compass.
Calibrating the digital compass
Left/right-hand steering
The digital compass must be calibrated in the
event of the following: The digital compass is already set for right or
left-hand steering at the factory.
  The wrong compass point is displayed.
  The point of the compass displayed does
Setting the language
not change despite changing the direction
Press and hold the control button for approx.
of travel.
12 to 13 seconds. Briefly press the control
  Not all points of the compass are dis 
button again to reel between English "E" and
played.
German "O".

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 139
Interior equipment Controls
Settings are stored automatically after approxi  Replace the cover after use
mately 10 seconds.
Reinsert the lighter or socket cover after
use, otherwise objects may get into the lighter
socket or fixture and cause a short circuit. 
Sun visor
Overview
Glare shield
Fold the sun visor down or up.
Vanity mirror
A vanity mirror is located in the sun visor be 
hind a cover. When the cover is opened, the
mirror lighting switches on.
Ashtray/cigarette lighter
The cigarette lighter is located between the
front seats.
Ashtray
Push in the lighter.
Overview
The lighter can be removed as
soon as it pops back out.
Connecting electrical
devices
Hints
The ashtray can be inserted in the cupholder.
Do not connect charging devices to the
12 volt socket in the vehicle
Emptying
Do not connect battery chargers to the fac 
Take out the insert. tory-installed 12 volt sockets in the vehicle as
this may damage the vehicle battery due to an
Lighter increased power consumption. 
Danger of burns
Replace the cover after use
Only hold the hot lighter by its knob; oth 
Reinsert the lighter or socket cover after
erwise, there is a danger of getting burned.
use, otherwise objects may get into the lighter
Switch off operating readiness and take the re  socket or fixture and cause a short circuit. 
mote control with you when leaving the vehicle
so that children cannot use the lighter and
burn themselves. 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 140
Controls Interior equipment
Sockets In the trunk
General information
The lighter socket can be used as a socket for
electrical equipment when operating and drive
readiness are activated.
Note
The total load of all sockets must not exceed
140 watts at 12 volts.
Do not damage the socket by using unsuitable The socket is located on the right side in the
connectors. trunk. Remove the cover.
Front center console
USB interface for data
transfer
The concept
Connection for importing and exporting data
on USB devices, e.g.:
  Personal Profile settings, refer to page 39.
  Music collection.
The socket is located underneath the instru    Importing Trips.
ment panel. Remove the cover.
Hints
Between the front seats Observe the following when connecting:
  Do not use force when plugging the con 
nector into the USB interface.
  Do not connect devices such as fans or
lights to the USB interface.
  Do not connect USB hard drives.
  Do not use the USB interface for recharg 
ing external devices.
The socket is located between the front seats.
Remove the cover or cigarette lighter.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 141
Interior equipment Controls
At a glance Installing
1. Place the cover in the brackets.
2. Attach the retaining straps.
Enlarging the trunk
General information
The cargo area can be enlarged by folding
down the rear seat backrest.
The socket is located between the front seats. Hints
Danger of jamming
Before folding down the rear seat back 
Cargo area
rests, ensure that the area of movement of the
backrests is clear. Ensure that no one is lo 
Cargo cover cated in or reaches into the area of movement
of the rear seat backrests. Otherwise, injury or
General information damage may result. 
The cargo cover is raised when the tailgate is
Ensuring the stability of the child seat
opened.
When installing child restraint systems,
Note make sure that the child seat is securely fas 
tened to the backrest of the seat. Angle and
Do not deposit heavy objects
headrest of the backrest might need to be ad 
Do not deposit heavy or hard objects on justed or possibly be removed. Make sure that
the cargo cover. Otherwise, they may pose a all backrests are securely locked. Otherwise
risk to occupants, such as during braking and the stability of the child seat can be affected,
evasive maneuvers.  and there is an increased risk of injury because
of unexpected movement of the seat back 
Removing rest. 
1. Detach the retaining straps at the tailgate.
Ensure that the lock is securely engaged
2. Raise the cover and pull it back to remove.
When you fold back the backrest make
sure that it locks in place. The red mark on the
front loop must disappear. Otherwise trans 
ported cargo could shoot into the car's interior
during braking or evasive maneuvers and en 
danger occupants. 
Fold in headrests, before rear seat back 
rests are folded down
Before folding down the rear seat backrests,
make sure that the corresponding headrest is
pushed all the way down and folded away; oth 
erwise, damage may result. 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 142
Controls Interior equipment
Folding down rear seat backrest
Only use loops for releasing the rear seat
backrests
Do not use the loops for releasing the rear seat
backrests to attach objects; otherwise there is
an increased risk of injury because of unex 
pected movement of the rear seat backrest. 
The rear seat backrest can be folded down
from the front or from the cargo area. Or: pull the corresponding loop in the cargo
area and fold the seat backrest forward.
To secure cargo, refer to page 153, with nets
or draw straps, the cargo area is fitted with
lashing eyes.
Loading position of the rear seat
backrest
The rear seat backrests can be individually set
in two different positions.
Before folding down the backrest, make sure
To expand the cargo area, the rear seat back 
that the belt is located in the belt buckle.
rest can be moved into a vertical position.
1. Pull corresponding loop.
2. Set the loading position of the seat back 
rest.
3. Latch the rear seat backrest. The red mark
on the front loop must disappear.
Rear seat backrest basic position
When folding back the backrests from the
folded down position, first latch them in the
Pull the corresponding loop on the seat back 
loading position.
rest forward.
1. Pull corresponding loop.
2. Fold the rear seat backrest rearward.
3. Pull loop again.
4. Fold rear seat backrest all the way back.
5. Latch the rear seat backrest. The red mark
on the front loop must disappear.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 143
Storage compartments Controls
Storage compartments
Vehicle features and options Glove compartment
This chapter describes all standard, countryFront passenger side
specific and optional features offered with the
series. It also describes features that are not
Note
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
the selected options or country versions. This Close the glove compartment again im 
also applies to safety-related functions and mediately
systems. The respectively applicable country Close the glove compartment immediately af 
provisions must be observed when using the ter use while driving; otherwise, injury may oc 
respective features and systems. cur during accidents. 
Opening
Hints
No loose objects in the car's interior
Do not stow any objects in the car's inte 
rior without securing them; otherwise, they
may present a danger to occupants e.g., during
braking and evasive maneuvers. 
Do not place anti-slip mats on the dash 
board
Do not place anti-slip mats on the dashboard.
Press button and open cover upward.
The mat materials could damage the dash 
board. 
Closing
Fold cover closed.
Storage compartments
The following storage compartments are avail  Between the front seats
able in the vehicle interior:
  Glove compartment on the front passenger Center armrest
side, refer to page 143.
Open/tilt
  Between the front seats, refer to
page 143. A storage compartment is located in the center
armrest between the seats.
  Compartments in the front doors, refer to
page 145.
  Rear seat, refer to page 145.
  Storage compartments in the trunk, refer
to page 145

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 144
Controls Storage compartments
Receptacle for cupholder
To open, press button, arrow 1.
To open, press button, arrow 2.
There is a receptacle for the cup holder be 
tween the seats.
Front cup holder
Hints
Shatter-proof containers and no hot
drinks
Use light and shatter-proof containers and do
not transport hot drinks. Otherwise, there is
the increased danger of injury in an accident. 
Unsuitable containers
There are three receptacles for the cup holder
Do not forcefully push unsuitable con 
between the seats.
tainers into the cupholders. This may result in
damage. 
Connection for an external audio
device
Overview
An external audio device, e.g.,
Between the seats.
an MP3 player, can be con 
nected via the AUX-IN port or
the USB audio interface be 
tween the seats.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 145
Storage compartments Controls
Storage compartment Overview
There is a storage compartment between the Between the seats.
seats.
Clothes hooks
Compartments in the doors
Do not obstruct view
Do not stow any breakable objects
When suspending clothing from the
Do not store any breakable objects, e. g. hooks, ensure that it will not obstruct the driv 
glass bottles, in the compartments, or there is er's view. 
an increased risk of injury in the event of an ac 
No heavy objects
cident. 
Do not hang heavy objects from the
hooks; otherwise, they may present a danger
Rear seat to passengers during braking and evasive ma 
neuvers. 
Rear cup holder Two folding clothes hooks are provided in the
rear of the vehicle. To unfold them, press on
Hints the top edge of the clothes hooks.
Shatter-proof containers and no hot
drinks
Storage compartments in the
Use light and shatter-proof containers and do
trunk
not transport hot drinks. Otherwise, there is
the increased danger of injury in an accident. 
Retaining strap
Unsuitable containers
A retaining strap is available on the right and
Do not forcefully push unsuitable con  left side trim for fastening small objects.
tainers into the cupholders. This may result in
damage.  Lashing eyes in the trunk
To secure the cargo, refer to page 153, there
are four lashing eyes in the trunk.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Driving tips
This chapter provides you with information
useful in dealing with specific driving and
operating modes.
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 148
Driving tips Things to remember when driving
Things to remember when driving
Vehicle features and options Brake system
Brakes require an initial break-in period of ap 
This chapter describes all standard, countryprox. 300 miles/500 km to achieve optimal per 
specific and optional features offered with the
formance between brake discs and brake
series. It also describes features that are not
pads. Drive moderately during this break-in pe 
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
riod.
the selected options or country versions. This
also applies to safety-related functions and
Following part replacement
systems. The respectively applicable country
The same break-in procedures should be ob 
provisions must be observed when using the
served if any of the components above-men 
respective features and systems.
tioned have to be renewed in the course of the
vehicle's operating life.
Breaking-in period
Using eDRIVE efficiently
General information
Moving parts need time to adjust to one an 
The concept
other (break-in time).
eDRIVE operates automatically. Proactive driv 
The following instructions will help accomplish
ing utilizes energy consumption and energy re 
a long vehicle life and good efficiency.
covery optimally. Energy recovery is used to
charge the high-voltage battery. It is important
Range Extender
for the supply of electrical components and
The full performance of the Range Extender is
thus a prerequisite for an extensive range. En 
available after a brief operating period and is
ergy consumption and recovery depend very
only minimally restricted during the run-in
much, among other things, on your driving
phase.
style.
Control of the Range Extender during and after
the run-in phase, as well as the activation of Optimizing driving style
the full performance, are preset depending on
the system and take place automatically. Performance display
The driving style can be optimized using the
Tires
performance display.
Tire traction is not optimal due to manufactur 
ing circumstances when tires are brand-new;
they achieve their full traction potential after a
break-in time.
Drive conservatively for the first
200 miles/300 km.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 149
Things to remember when driving Driving tips
charging location. If necessary, the high-volt 
age battery will be charged automatically.
Make sure that the charging process takes
place. Regularly check the charging state.
Don't allow battery charge status to drop too
low - it will damage the battery. 
General driving notes
The energy recovery occurs during coasting
and braking and is displayed in the perform  Closing the tailgate
ance display by the accelerator pedal indicator.
Drive with the tailgate closed
The accelerator pedal pointer is within the
Only drive with the tailgate closed; other 
CHARGE range.
wise, in the event of an accident or braking and
Efficient energy recovery:
evasive maneuvers, passengers and other traf 
  The accelerator pedal moves to the left fic may be injured, and the vehicle may be
within the blue range of the CHARGE dis  damaged. Moreover, exhaust gases can get
play, arrow 1. into the vehicle interior and the lights in the
tailgate cannot be recognized. 
  The energy use while driving can be opti 
mized by efficient acceleration.
If driving with the tailgate open cannot be
Efficient acceleration: avoided:
  The accelerator pedal moves to the right   Close all windows and the glass sunroof.
within the blue range of the ePOWER dis 
  Greatly increase the air flow from the vents.
play, arrow 2.
  Drive moderately.
  Use deceleration during coasting as often
as possible for energy recovery.
Hot exhaust system
Brake according to traffic and circum  Hot exhaust system
stances High temperatures are generated in the
Brake in accordance with the traffic conditions, exhaust system.
or there is the risk of accident.  Do not remove the heat shields installed and
never apply undercoating to them. Make sure
Discharge of the high-voltage battery that flammable materials, e. g. hay, leaves,
grass, etc. do not come in contact with the hot
Longer idle periods, refer to page 203, can re 
exhaust system while driving, while in idle po 
duce the charging state of the high-voltage
sition mode, or when parked. Such contact
battery.
could lead to a fire, resulting in an increased
Do not allow the vehicle to sit idle for ex  risk of serious personal injury as well as prop 
tended periods with a low charging state erty damage.
Before storing the vehicle for an extended pe  Do not touch hot exhaust pipes; otherwise,
riod, check the battery charge indicator to en  there is a danger of getting burned. 
sure that the high-voltage battery is fully
charged. During the idle period, connect the
vehicle to a charging station at a suitable

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 150
Driving tips Things to remember when driving
Mobile communication devices in the Steering is still responsive. You can still avoid
vehicle any obstacles with a minimum of steering ef 
fort.
Mobile communication devices in the ve 
hicle Pulsation of the brake pedal and sounds from
the hydraulic circuits indicate that ABS is in its
It is not recommended to use mobile phones,
active mode.
such as mobile phones, in the vehicle interior
without a direct connection to an external aer  In certain braking situations, the perforated
ial. Otherwise, the vehicle's electronics and brake discs can cause functional problems.
mobile communication devices can interfere However, this has no effect on the perform 
with each other. In addition, there is no assur  ance and operational reliability of the brake.
ance that the radiation generated during trans 
Objects in the range of movement of
mission will be conducted away from the vehi 
the pedals and in the footwell
cle interior. 
Do not allow objects in the interior
Hydroplaning around pedals and foot space
Hydroplaning Keep floor mats, carpets, and any other ob 
jects out of the pedal area and do not stow
When driving on wet or slushy roads, re 
them in the footwell; otherwise, the function of
duce your speed to prevent hydroplaning. 
the pedals could be impeded while driving.
On wet or slushy roads, a wedge of water can
Do not place additional floor mats over existing
form between the tires and road surface.
mats or other objects.
This phenomenon is referred to as hydroplan 
Only use floor mats that have been approved
ing. It is characterized by a partial or complete
for the vehicle and can be properly attached to
loss of contact between the tires and the road
floor.
surface, ultimately undermining your ability to
Ensure that the floor mats are securely fas 
steer and brake the vehicle.
tened again after they were removed for clean 
ing, e.g. 
Driving through water
Observe water level and speed
Hills
Do not exceed the maximum water level
Avoid stressing the brakes
and maximum speed; otherwise, the vehicle's
engine, the electrical systems and the trans  Avoid placing excessive stress on the
mission may be damaged.  brake system. Light but consistent brake pres 
sure can lead to high temperatures, brakes
Drive though calm water only and only if it is
wearing out and possibly even brake failure. 
not deeper than 9.8 inches/25 cm and at this
height, no faster than walking speed, up to Do not drive in neutral
3 mph/5 km/h.
Do not drive in neutral or with drive readi 
ness switched off, as doing so disables engine
Braking safely
braking. In addition, steering and brake assist
Your vehicle is equipped with ABS as a stand  are unavailable with the engine stopped. 
ard feature.
On downhill sections, use energy recovery if
Applying the brakes fully is the most effective
possible to decelerate the vehicle.
way of braking in situations needed.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 151
Things to remember when driving Driving tips
Brake disc corrosion
Brake disc corrosion and contamination of the
brake pads are favored by:
  Low mileage.
  Extended periods when the vehicle is not
used at all.
  Infrequent use of the brakes.
Corrosion will built up when the maximum
pressure applied to the brake pads during
braking is not reached - thus discs don't get
cleaned.
Corrosion buildup on the brake discs will cause
a pulsating effect on the brakes in their re 
sponse - generally that cannot be corrected.
Condensation under the parked
vehicle
When using the automatic climate control,
condensation water develops collecting under 
neath the vehicle.
These traces of water under the vehicle are
normal.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 152
Driving tips Loading
Loading
Vehicle features and options Only use loops for releasing the rear seat
backrests
This chapter describes all standard, countryDo not use the loops for releasing the rear seat
specific and optional features offered with the
backrests to attach objects; otherwise there is
series. It also describes features that are not
an increased risk of injury because of unex 
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
pected movement of the rear seat backrest. 
the selected options or country versions. This
also applies to safety-related functions and
systems. The respectively applicable country
Determining the load limit
provisions must be observed when using the
respective features and systems.
1. Locate the following statement on your ve 
hicle's placard:
Hints   The combined weight of occupants
and cargo should never exceed XXX kg
Overloading the vehicle
or YYY lbs. Otherwise, damage to the
To avoid exceeding the approved ca  vehicle and unstable driving situations
pacity of the tires, never overload the vehicle. may result.
Overloading can lead to overheating and in 
creases the rate at which damage develops in 
side the tires. This could result in a sudden
loss of tire inflation pressure. 
No fluids in the cargo area
Make sure that fluids do not leak into the
cargo area; otherwise, the vehicle may be dam 
aged. 
Heavy and hard objects 2. Determine the combined weight of the
Do not stow any heavy and hard objects driver and passengers that will be riding in
in the car's interior without securing them; oth  your vehicle.
erwise, they may present a danger to occu  3. Subtract the combined weight of the driver
pants, e.g., during braking and evasive maneu  and passengers from XXX kilograms or
vers.  YYY pounds.
4. The resulting figure equals the available
Load cargo area only with the cargo area
amount of cargo and luggage load ca 
floor installed
pacity.
Load the cargo area only if the cargo area floor
For example, if the YYY amount equals
is located in the cargo area. Otherwise, the
1,000 lbs and there will be four 150 lbs
cover of the engine below it could be dam 
passengers in your vehicle, the amount of
aged. 
available cargo and luggage load capacity

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 153
Loading Driving tips
is 400 lbs: 1,000 lbs minus 600 lbs = Securing cargo
400 lbs.
5. Determine the combined weight of lug  Lashing eyes in the trunk
gage and cargo being loaded on the vehi 
cle. That weight may not safely exceed the
available cargo and luggage load capacity
calculated in Step 4.
Load
To secure the cargo there are four lashing
eyes in the cargo area.
Securing cargo
Securing cargo
Stow and secure the cargo as described;
The maximum load is the sum of the weight of otherwise it may present a danger to the occu 
the occupants and the cargo. pants, e.g., during braking and evasive maneu 
vers. 
The greater the weight of the occupants, the
less cargo that can be transported.
  Smaller and lighter items: secure with re 
taining straps or draw straps.
  Larger and heavy objects: secure with
Stowing cargo
cargo straps.
Attach the cargo straps, retaining straps or
  Do not exceed permissible rear axle load.
draw straps to the lashing eyes in the trunk.
  Cover sharp edges and corners on the
cargo.
  Heavy cargo: stow as far forward as possi 
ble, directly behind and at the bottom of
the rear passenger seat backrests.
  Very heavy cargo: when the rear seat is not
occupied, secure each of the safety belts in
the opposite buckle.
  If necessary, fold down the rear backrests
to stow cargo.
  Do not stack cargo above the top edge of
the backrests.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 154
Driving tips Increase range
Increase range
General information Check the tire inflation pressure
regularly
The vehicle contains comprehensive technolo 
Check and, if needed, correct the tire inflation
gies for reducing the energy consumption and
pressure at least twice a month and before
for maximizing the range.
starting on a long trip.
The range depends on a number of different
Low tire inflation pressure increases rolling re 
factors.
sistance and thus raises energy consumption
The implementation of certain measures, driv 
and tire wear.
ing style and regular maintenance can increase
range and thereby also reduce the environ 
mental impact. Standing air conditioning
Run advance climate control, refer to
Remove unnecessary cargo page 133, in the vehicle during charging if pos 
sible before driving off.
Additional weight reduces the range.
Heating and cooling operations are very en 
ergy intensive and substantially reduce the
electric range.
Remove attached parts
following use
Look well ahead when
Attached parts on the vehicle impair the aero 
driving
dynamics and increase the energy consump 
tion.
Avoid unnecessary acceleration and braking.
By maintaining a suitable distance to the vehi 
Close the windows and glass cle driving ahead of you.
sunroof Driving smoothly and proactively reduces en 
ergy consumption.
Driving with the glass sunroof and windows
Longer braking procedures result in more effi 
open results in increased air resistance and
cient charging of the high-voltage battery via
thereby reduces the range.
energy recovery from braking.
Tires
Use accelerator pedal for
deceleration and coasting
General information
Tires can affect energy consumption in various When approaching a red light, use accelerator
ways, for instance energy consumption can be pedal for decelerating.
influenced by tire size. For going downhill use coasting function; for
this purpose, press accelerator pedal just
enough that the vehicle rolls.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 155
Increase range Driving tips
Switch off any functions that ECO PRO
are not currently needed   Reduce heat output or heating cycle for ex 
terior mirror, rear window and seat heating.
Functions such as the rear window defroster
  What reduces the the cooling and heating
require a lot of energy and reduce the range,
output of the climate control system.
especially in city and stop-and-go traffic.
  The speed is limited to an adjustable maxi 
Reel off these functions if they are not needed.
mum value between 50 mph/80 km/h and
The ECO PRO and ECO PRO+ driving pro 
80 mph/130 km/h. To intentionally exceed
grams support the energy-conserving use of
the speed limit, press the accelerator pedal
comfort features. They automatically perform a
all the way down.
partial or complete deactivation of these func 
tions.
ECO PRO+
The cooling and heating output of the climate
control system are additionally deactivated on
Have maintenance carried
ECO PRO+ activation.
out
The low beams are dimmed.
Have vehicles maintained regularly to achieve The maximum speed is limited to
optimal vehicle efficiency and operating life. 55 mph/90 km/h. In special situations, the
The maintenance should be carried out by speed limit can be consciously exceeded by
your service center. applying the accelerator pedal.
Also note the BMW Maintenance System, refer
to page 188. Activate ECO PRO and ECO PRO+
Press button repeatedly until ECO
PRO or ECO PRO+ is displayed in the
ECO PRO and ECO PRO+
instrument cluster.
The concept
Configuring ECO PRO
ECO PRO and ECO PRO+ support an efficient
driving style. To this end, the control of the
Via the Driving Dynamics Control
drive is optimized for moderate acceleration,
1. Activate ECO PRO.
and adapted to lighting and comfort features,
such as climate control output. Some vehicle 2. "Configure ECO PRO"
functions cannot be used during activated
3. Configure the program.
drive mode ECO PRO and ECO PRO+.
In addition, context-sensitive instructions can Via the iDrive
be displayed that assist in driving efficiently.
1. "Settings"
2. "ECO PRO mode"
At a glance
Or
With ECO PRO and ECO PRO+ different set 
tings are made in the respective mode. 1. "Settings"
2. "Driving mode"
3. "Configure ECO PRO"
Configure the program.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 156
Driving tips Increase range
ECO PRO Tip Mark in the ePOWER area, arrow 2: display
when accelerating.
  "Limit at:":
Your driving style's efficiency is shown by the
Adjust the ECO PRO speed.
bar's color:
  "ECO PRO speed warning":
  Blue display: efficient driving style as long
The output is reduced once the set ECO
as the mark moves within the blue range.
PRO speed is reached.
  Gray display: adjust driving style, e. g., by
reduced acceleration.
Coasting
The display switches to blue as soon as all
With little pressure on the accelerator pedal,
conditions for fuel-efficiency-optimized driving
the vehicle can coast without energy recovery.
are met.
The accelerator pedal indicator in the instru 
ment display is centered between CHARGE
and ePOWER during coasting. ECO PRO Tip
ECO PRO climate control
Driving tip
"ECO PRO climate control" As soon as one of the conditions for efficient
Climate control is set to be fuel-efficient. driving is no longer fulfilled, respective driving
instructions are displayed as a symbol in the
By making a slight change to the set tempera 
instrument cluster.
ture, or slowly adjusting the rate of heating or
cooling of the car's interior, fuel consumption
Symbols
can be economized.
An additional symbol and a text message are
ECO PRO potential displayed on the control display.
Shows potential savings with the current set  Symbol Measure
tings in percentages.
For efficient driving back off the ac 
Display in the instrument cluster celerator or delay accelerating to al 
low time to assess road conditions.
Efficiency display
Reduce speed to the selected ECO
PRO speed.
Note
The efficiency display and ECO PRO tips in the
instrument cluster appear when the ECO PRO
display is activated.
Activating driving style and ECO PRO tips:
1. "Settings"
A mark in the performance display informs
2. "Instrument cluster"
about the current driving style.
3. "ECO PRO Info"
Mark in the CHARGE range, arrow 1: indication
for energy recovery and braking.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 157
Increase range Driving tips
Indications on the Control Display 3. Select the symbol.
eDRIVE Display on the Control Display
Information on fuel consumption and technol 
ogy can be displayed while driving.
1. "Vehicle info"
2. "eDRIVE"
Displaying ECO PRO Tips
ECO PRO Tips can be displayed while driving
as a note in the split screen in the energy flow
display.
The display of the ECO PRO driving style anal 
Displaying ECO PRO Tips: ysis consists of a symbolized route and a
lookup table.
1. "Vehicle info"
The road symbolizes the efficiency of the driv 
2. "eDRIVE"
ing style. The more efficient the driving style,
3. "ECO PRO Tips"
the smoother the depicted route becomes, ar 
Settings are stored for the profile currently in row 1.
use.
The table of values contains stars. The more
efficient the driving style, the more stars are
ECO PRO driving style analysis
displayed in the table, arrow 2.
If, on the other hand, the driving style is ineffi 
The concept
cient, a wavy road and a reduced number of
The system helps develop a particularly effi 
stars is displayed.
cient driving style and to save energy.
To assist with an efficient driving style, ECO
For this purpose, the driving style is analyzed.
PRO tips are displayed during driving.
The assessment is done in various categories
Tips about the energy saving driving style, In 
and is displayed on the Control Display.
crease range, refer to page 154.
Those assessments will help you adjust your
driving style and save some energy.
The last fifteen minutes of a trip are evaluated.
The range of the vehicle can be extended by
an efficient driving style.
Functional requirement
The function is only available in ECO PRO
mode.
Calling up ECO PRO driving style
analysis
1. Activate ECO PRO.
2. "eDRIVE"

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Mobility
In order to always ensure your mobility, you will
find important information on operating fluids,
wheels and tires, maintenance and Roadside
Assistance in the following.
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 160
Mobility Charging vehicle
Charging vehicle
Vehicle features and options Charge current
The charge current strength is indicated in am 
This chapter describes all standard, countryperes.
specific and optional features offered with the
The vehicle cannot automatically detect the
series. It also describes features that are not
maximum permissible charge current strength
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
of the power grid during charging via a house 
the selected options or country versions. This
hold socket or charging station.
also applies to safety-related functions and
systems. The respectively applicable country
Level 1 charging
provisions must be observed when using the
respective features and systems. Prior to the first Level 1 charging at your own
household socket, as well as when charging at
external electrical power sockets in Level 1,
The concept the allowed charge current strength must be
determined, e.g. by a qualified electrician.
The vehicle can be charged using various
The charge current strength for Level 1 charg 
charging cables at charging stations or hous 
ing, refer to page 165, can be adjusted in the
hold sockets. Control and monitoring of the
vehicle in three steps.
charging process are handled completely au 
tomatically. The charge current strength can At delivery, the charge current for
be set by means of the Control Display. Level 1 charging is set to "Low".
Depending on the country-specific version,
one of four ampere ratings is printed on the
General information
Level 1 charging cable. This ampere rating is
the limit which must be adhered to for the vehi 
High-voltage battery cle if the charge current is set to "Maximum".
According to the market-specific version, the
The high-voltage battery is used as an energy
charge current strength changes differently if
accumulator. The high-voltage battery can be
the setting "Reduced" or "Low" is selected.
charged by energy recovery during the trip or
via the power grid.
"Maximum" "Reduced" "Low"
When charging via the power grid, you can
8 A 6 A 6 A
chose between the following variants.
  Level 1 charging via a household socket. 10 A 7.5 A 6 A
  Level 2 charging via a Level 2 charging sta 
12 A 9 A 6 A
tion.
15 A 11.25 A 7.5 A
  Charging via a DC charging station.
Level 1 charging is possible via a household
Charging at a Level 2 charging station
socket within a voltage range of 100 volts to
240 volts. The permitted charge current strength must
be determined prior to charging at a
For optimal use of the energy from the power
Level 2 charging station, e.g. from the operator
grid, charging at a Level 2 charging station,
such as BMW i Wallbox, is recommended.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 161
Charging vehicle Mobility
of the Level 2 charging station. The permitted Follow instructions at the charging sta 
charge current strength can vary by country. tion
The charge current strength for Level 2 charg  When working with electrical current, follow
ing, refer to page 166, can be adjusted in the the instructions at the charging station. Other 
vehicle in two steps. wise, there is a risk of an accident. 
At delivery, the charge current for
Make sure that the charging device is in
Level 2 charging is set to "Reduced". This set 
flawless operating condition
ting should be maintained, unless it was veri 
Only use the charging device in a flawless con 
fied that a higher charge current strength is
dition. Otherwise, a risk of fire may result, e.g.,
permitted in the individual case.
from the device heating up because of, say,
The charge current changes depending on the
worn contacts or damage. 
setting.
No simultaneous charging and refueling
"Maximum" "Reduced"
Do not refuel while a charging cable is
32 A 20 A
plugged in, and maintain an adequate safety
distance from highly flammable materials. Oth 
Depending on the charge current, the charging erwise, there is a danger of personal injury and
duration changes. property damage from burning fuel vapors,
e.g., if the charging cable is improperly plug 
Range Extender ged in or unplugged. 
With Range Extender, refer to page 69,
Have the charging port cleaned by
switched on, the current charging state can be
trained personnel
maintained. In this way, a higher range is ach 
If the charging port is dirty, have the car
ieved.
cleaned only by appropriately trained person 
nel. Otherwise, there is a danger of injury from
Hints high voltage. 
Working with electrical current
When working with electrical current, ob  Charging cable
serve the safety regulations. Otherwise, with
high voltage or excess current there is a risk to General information
persons and property, e.g., from electrocution
Use a Level 1 charging cable, Level 2 charging
or fire. 
cable or the permanently installed charging ca 
ble of a charging station to charge the vehicle.
Have the charging device checked be 
fore commissioning Different charging cables can be required de 
pending on the country.
Before the initial charging process, have your
own charging device checked at the charging
Hints
location by a qualified electrician, that is,
charging port on the vehicle, charging cable, Use approved charging cables only
charging station or household socket and con 
Use only approved charging cables or
nected circuits. Otherwise, there is a danger of
charging stations for charging. Otherwise,
damage to the vehicle and overloading of the
there is a danger of property damage or per 
supply mains at the charging location. 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 162
Mobility Charging vehicle
sonal injury, e.g., from burning cables. Informa  ble to charge at DC charging stations. Charg 
tion about the approved charging cables can ing is performed with direct current at
be obtained from the service center.  designated DC charging stations. At the higher
lidacity current connection of a DC charger
Use the charging cable only for charging
station the charging time is significantly lower
the vehicle, and do not extend it
than with a household socket or a level 2
Use the charging cable only for charging the charging station.
vehicle and do not extend it with cables or
During charging at a DC charging station, an
adapters. Otherwise, it may not be possible to
indication in the instrument cluster, refer to
complete the charging process or property
page 166, is displayed.
damage might occur, e.g., due to a cable fire. 
Storage
Do not use any damaged charging cables
The Level 1 charging cable is located in the ca 
Do not use any damaged charging ca 
ble compartment under the hood.
bles. Otherwise, there is a risk of injury from
high voltage.  The Level 2 charging cable can be stored in
the same place.
Level 1 charging cable Moisture can penetrate into the occasional use
cable compartment, e.g. in a car wash.
With the Level 1 charging cable, it is permissi 
ble to perform charging from grounded house  If required, store the charging cable with the
hold sockets. At the power connection of a installed plug cover to prevent moisture in the
household socket, charging is done with alter  charging cable plug.
nating current.
When a Level 1 charging cable is used, this
may produce efficiency values other than indi 
cated on the energy label.
Level 2 charging cable
The Level 2 charging cable makes it possible
to recharge at sockets of designated
Level 2 charging stations using a special plug.
Charging is performed with alternating current
at designated Level 2 charging stations. The
charging process can be completed faster than
at household sockets.
If necessary, the charging cable is attached to
the charging station.
If a Level 2 charging cable is used, apply the
corresponding setting on the Control Display,
refer to page 166.
DC charging cable
The DC charging cable that is permanently in 
stalled at the charging station makes is possi 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 163
Charging vehicle Mobility
Connection Charging cable is unlocked.
To connect, engage selector lever in position P 2. Press the release button on the handle, ar 
and unlock the vehicle. Set the parking brake if row 1, and grasp the charging cable at the
needed. gripping areas.
Charging process is interrupted.
1. Tap on the charging port flap, arrow.
3. Remove the charging cable from the
2. Remove the charging port lid, arrow.
charging port, arrow 2.
4. Put the charging port lid back on.
5. Close the charging port flap.
6. Attach cover of the charging cable plug if
needed.
7. Disconnect either the Level 1 or Level 2
charging cable from the household socket
or the port on the charging station as
needed.
3. Connect either a Level 1 or Level 2 charg 
8. Stow the charging cable.
ing cable to the household socket or the
At a charging station, insert the perma 
port on the charging station.
nently installed charging cable in the place
4. Remove cover of the charging cable plug if
provided for it.
needed.
5. Insert the charging cable plug correspond 
ing to the charging port, and push it in until Manual release
it latches.
The charging port flap is automatically locked
When charging at a charging station, follow the
while driving.
instructions at the charging station.
The charging cable may be locked during the
charging process if the vehicle is locked.
Remove
When the vehicle is locked, the charging cable
is locked. Unlock the vehicle before removing
the cable.
1. Unlock the vehicle by remote control if it is
locked.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 164
Mobility Charging vehicle
Manually unlocking charging port flap 4. Grasp the charging cable at the gripping
areas.
In case of an electrical malfunction of the
charging cable lock, the charging port flap can 5. Remove charging cable.
be manually unlocked.
1. Open rear door on the side of the charging
Charging operation
port flap.
2. Remove the cover.
Hints
3. Pull the blue knob, arrow. This releases
Following safety instructions of the
the charging port flap.
power mains connection
During the charging process, heed the safety
instructions of the respective power mains
connection. Otherwise, there could be a risk of
personal injury or property damage from high
voltage, e.g., from electrocution or fire. 
Using a Level 1 charging cable at other
household sockets
Before charging at other household sockets,
4. If necessary, press the knob back into the adapt the charging current strength to the
initial position. mains. Otherwise, there is a risk of fire, e.g.,
from overheating of the household socket or
Manual unlocking of the charging overloading of the power mains. 
cable
In case of an electrical malfunction, the charg  Starting charging process
ing cable can be manually unlocked.
1. Engage selector lever position P. Set the
When charging at a charging station, complete parking brake if needed.
the charging process at the charging station
2. Planning charging process, refer to
before unlocking the charging cable.
page 165.
1. Open rear door on the side of the charging 3. Switch off drive readiness.
port flap.
4. Connect either a Level 1 or Level 2 charg 
2. Remove the cover. ing cable to the household socket or the
port on the charging station.
3. Pull the blue knob, arrow. Charging ca 
ble is manually unlocked. 5. Open charging port flap.
6. Connect charging cable to the vehicle, re 
fer to page 163.
At high temperatures, initially the high-voltage
battery is cooled. The charging process can be
started with a delay.
Display of the charging status
The charging status is indicated by the indica 
tor light at the charging port.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 165
Charging vehicle Mobility
The following settings are available:
  Immediate charging.
  Set time window for favorable charging.
  Set charging via a Level 1 charging cable.
  Set charging via a Level 2 charging cable.
If drive readiness is switched off, changes can
be made on the Control Display. Departure
time can only be changed once. Scheduled de 
  Lamp white: charging cable can be con  parture times are not adjusted. Settings for
nected or removed. standing air conditioning and loading process
  Lamp flashes yellow: charging process is are accepted for planned departure times too.
being initialized
Immediate charging
  Lamp blue: charging process is started at a
set time. The charging process starts as soon as the
charging cable is connected.
  Lamp flashes blue: charging process ac 
tive. 1. "Settings"
  Lamp flashes red: fault in the charging 2. "Charging"
process.
3. "Charge immediately"
  Lamp green: charging process completed.
Setting time window for favorable
When the vehicle is locked, the indicator lamp
charging
goes out after some time.
When the vehicle is unlocked, the blue indica  Level 1 or Level 2 charging:
tor lamp flashes continuously. The other indi  When departure time is set, a time window for
cator lights go out after some time. charging with a favorable electricity rate can be
To check the charging process, press the set.
key on the remote control. The charging status
1. "Settings"
is indicated on the indicator lamp. In some
2. "Charging"
cases the vehicle is locked.
3. "Low cost charging"
Additional messages regarding the charging
status, e.g., probable end of charging or the 4. Set rate begin. Turn the controller until the
planned departure time, can be displayed in desired time is set and press the controller.
the instrument cluster, on the Control Display 5. Set rate end. Turn the controller until the
and via the BMW i Remote App on the smart  desired time is set and press the controller.
phone.
Setting charging via a
Planning charging process Level 1 charging cable
The charging process can be adapted to con  Depending on the electrical mains, the vehicle
straints, e.g., the cost of electricity. The vehicle must be charged with a different charging cur 
can control the charging process in such a way rent strength, refer to page 160.
that the charging process is completed at the
1. "Settings"
departure time. A departure time must be set
for this purpose, refer to page 167. 2. "Charging"

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 166
Mobility Charging vehicle
3. "AC charging power:" Terminating charging process
Settings are stored. When you change charg  1. Removing the charging cable from the ve 
ing locations you also might need to change hicle, refer to page 163.
the setting for charging.
2. Stow the charging cable as required.
Set the charge current strength at other
3. Close the charging port flap.
household sockets to "Low".
4. Lock vehicle if it is unlocked.
Setting charging via a
Level 2 charging cable
Displays in the instrument
Depending on the electrical mains, the vehicle
cluster
must be charged with a different charging cur 
rent strength, refer to page 160. The charging state indicator light, refer to
When charging with a Level 2 charging cable, page 77, shows the charging state of the highthe charging process can be completed faster voltage battery in the instrument cluster, if op 
at a Level 2 charging station. erating readiness is switched on. If all seg 
ments are filled, the high-voltage battery is
1. "Settings"
fully charged.
2. "Charging"
Even if no segments are filled, the high-voltage
3. "Level 2:" system is still under high voltage.
Settings are stored. When you change charg  Information regarding the charging process are
ing locations you also might need to change shown on the charging screen, refer to
the setting for charging. page 76.
Display Meaning
Stopping charging process
The charging operation can be stopped at any Blue plug: charging process active
time by removing the charging cable and con  or completed.
tinued at a later time by connecting the charg 
White plug: charging interruption.
ing cable in order to use other loads on the
power connection or to prevent simultaneous Running light: animated with active
high power from multiple loads. charging operation.
The charging operation is interrupted when the
End of charging time or set depar 
vehicle is unlocked and automatically resumed
ture time.
after a brief time or when it is locked.
Charging progress bar.
Continue charging operation
Running light: animated with active
If the charging operation is interrupted, e.g.,
charging operation.
through a temporary power failure, the charg 
ing operation is automatically continued after DC charging active on a DC charg 
the interruption. ing station.
Indicator in blue: charged electrical
range.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 167
Charging vehicle Mobility
If drive readiness is switched off, changes can
Display Meaning
be made on the Control Display. Departure
Indicator in white: maximum electri  time can only be changed once. Scheduled de 
cal range. parture times are not adjusted. Settings for cli 
mate control and charging operation are also
White clock: departure time set. applied for scheduled departure times.
Blue plug: charging process active
or completed. Climate control at departure time
White plug: charging interruption. 1. "Settings"
2. "Departure time"
Climate control activated at depar 
ture time. 3. "Precond. for departure"
Setting departure time
Range with Range Extender.
Level 1 or Level 2 charging:
1. "Settings"
Flashing: ventilation active.
2. "Departure time"
3. "Departure 1:"
Flashing: heating active.
4. Set the day of the week if needed.
Turn the controller until the desired day of
the week is set and press the controller.
Flashing: cooling active.
To select other days of the week, repeat
the operation.
5. Set the time.
Turn the controller until the desired time is
Departure time
set and press the controller.
Up to three departure times can be set.
The concept
For optimum range and climate control, the
Activating the departure time
departure time can be set before parking the
1. "Settings"
car.
2. "Departure time"
With a set departure time, the vehicle is cli 
mate controlled during the charging process Set departure times are displayed.
when climate control is set. Climate control
3. E. g. "Activate depart. time 1"
output is reduced during the trip. This in 
Up to three departure times can be activated.
creases the range.
The set departure time will be deactivated, if
The following settings are possible at depar 
the departure time was ignored three times in
ture time:
a row.
  Climate control at departure time.
  Planning a one-time departure time.
  Planning of up to three regular departure
times per day of the week.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 168
Mobility Charging vehicle
Climate control 4. Connect either a Level 1 or Level 2 charg 
ing cable to the household socket or the
General information port on the charging station.
5. Attach charging cable corresponding to
The following settings for climate control of
the charging socket connection.
the vehicle are possible:
Charging is started. The charging status is
  Activate stationary climate control immedi 
not displayed. Do not open vehicle during
ately, refer to page 133.
this time.
With stationary climate control activated
After several minutes, the vehicle is slightly
and no charging cable connected, the
charged. The onboard electronics are ready
range is reduced.
again. It is again possible to open the vehicle.
  Planned climate control at the set depar 
The charging status as well as the charging
ture time, refer to page 134.
state of the high-voltage battery can be dis 
played again.
Discharged high-voltage and Continue charging vehicle until desired range
is possible.
vehicle battery
If the vehicle battery cannot be charged, con 
tact the service center.
General information
In addition to the high-voltage battery, the ve 
hicle has a 12 volt vehicle battery, which is re 
quired for operation of the onboard electron 
ics.
If the high-voltage battery and the vehicle bat 
tery are discharged, it is not possible to oper 
ate the vehicle.
Place vehicle in service
To place the vehicle in service, charge as
usual.
If there is no possibility of charging on site,
contact the service center.
Charging vehicle with a discharged
vehicle battery
1. Unlock the vehicle, if needed, using the
integrated key, refer to page 38.
2. Secure the vehicle against rolling.
3. Manually unlock charging port flap if it is
locked, refer to page 163.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 169
Refueling Mobility
Refueling
Vehicle features and options General information
In the fuel tank, excess pressure can build up
This chapter describes all standard, countrydue to gasoline vapors which are dissipated
specific and optional features offered with the
before the tank lid is opened.
series. It also describes features that are not
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
Overview
the selected options or country versions. This
The button is located on the driver's footwell.
also applies to safety-related functions and
systems. The respectively applicable country
Tank venting
provisions must be observed when using the
respective features and systems. 1. Switch off drive readiness.
Hints 2. Press button to start the pressure
equalization.
Observe the fuel recommendation, refer to
The status of the tank venting is displayed
page 172, prior to refueling.
in the instrument cluster. In rare cases, the
A sufficient amount of fuel must be added to tank venting can last several minutes.
operate the Range Extender. When the Range
If the tank venting has been completed, a
Extender is activated, the current charging
message is displayed in the instrument
state is maintained. The vehicle has a greater
cluster. The tank lid is released for open 
range.
ing.
Do not refuel unless the engine is at a 3. Open the fuel filler flap.
standstill and the selector lever is in posi 
If the fuel filler flap is not opened within 10
tion P/N
minutes after the fuel filler flap was re 
Do not refuel unless the engine is at a standstill leased, the fuel filler flap relocks. Press
and the selector lever is in position P/N, other  button again.
wise the buildup of pressure may cause the
fuel nozzle to shut off prematurely. 
Fuel lid
Tank vent Opening
Before opening , vent the tank, refer to
The concept page 169.
The vehicle is equipped with a special fuel
tank. It is designed for special requirements
that arise in operation with the Range Ex 
tender.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 170
Mobility Refueling
1. Briefly press the rear edge of the fuel filler Manually unlocking fuel filler flap
flap.
In the event of an electrical malfunction, e.g.
The release is located in the trunk.
1. Open hood, refer to page 183.
2. Pull the green knob with the fuel pump
symbol. This releases the fuel filler flap.
2. Turn the tank lid counterclockwise.
3. Open the fuel filler flap.
4. Carefully open the fuel filler flap. Excess
pressure can build up in the fuel tank from
gasoline vapor.
3. Place the tank lid in the bracket attached to
the fuel filler flap.
5. Fuel the vehicle as usual. This may be diffi 
cult due to the residue pressure in the
tank, caused by frequent stopping of the
fuel pump nozzle, e.g.
Closing
1. Fit the lid and turn it clockwise until you Observe the following when
clearly hear a click.
refueling
2. Close the fuel filler flap.
The fuel tank is full when the filler nozzle clicks
Do not pinch the retaining strap
off the first time.
Do not pinch the retaining strap attached
to the lid; otherwise, the lid cannot be closed
properly and fuel vapors can escape. 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 171
Refueling Mobility
Do not overfill the fuel tank
Do not overfill the fuel tank; otherwise
fuel may eslide, causing harm to the environ 
ment and damaging the vehicle. 
Handling fuels
Observe safety regulations posted at the
gas station. 
No simultaneous charging and refueling
Do not refuel while a charging cable is
plugged in, and maintain an adequate safety
distance from highly flammable materials. Oth 
erwise, there is a danger of personal injury and
property damage from burning fuel vapors,
e.g., if the charging cable is improperly plug 
ged in or unplugged. 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 172
Mobility Fuel
Fuel
Vehicle features and options Ethanol should satisfy the following quality
standards:
This chapter describes all standard, countryUS: ASTM 4806-xx
specific and optional features offered with the
CAN: CGSB-3.511-xx
series. It also describes features that are not
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to xx: comply with the current standard in each
the selected options or country versions. This case.
also applies to safety-related functions and
Do not use a fuel with a higher percent 
systems. The respectively applicable country
age of ethanol
provisions must be observed when using the
Do not use a fuel with a higher ethanol per 
respective features and systems.
centage than recommended or one with other
types of alcohol, e.g. M5 to M100; otherwise
Fuel recommendation this could damage the engine and fuel supply
system. 
Note
Recommended fuel grade
General fuel quality
BMW recommends AKI 91.
Even fuels that conform to the specifica 
tions can be of low quality. This may cause en 
Minimum fuel grade
gine problems, for instance poor engine startBMW recommends AKI 89.
up behavior, poor handling and/or poor
performance. Switch gas stations or use a Minimum fuel grade
brand name fuel with a higher octane rating. 
Do not use any gasoline below the mini 
mum fuel grade as this may impair engine per 
Gasoline
formance. 
For the best fuel efficiency, the gasoline
should be sulfur-free or very low in sulfur con  Fuel supply in winter
tent.
Depending on the region, many gas stations
Fuels that are marked on the gas pump as con  sell fuel that has been customized to winter or
taining metal must not be used. summer conditions.
Refuel only with unleaded gasoline with  Fuel that is available in winter helps make a
out metallic additives. cold start easier, e. g.
Do not refuel with any leaded gasoline or gaso  The manufacturer of the vehicle recommends
line with metallic additives, e. g. manganese or filling the tank with the corresponding fuel at
iron, as this can cause permanent damage to the start of winter to ensure the operational re 
the catalytic converter and other compo  liability of the Range Extender at low tempera 
nents.  tures.
Fuels with a maximum ethanol content of
10 %, i. e., E10, may be used for refueling.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 173
Wheels and tires Mobility
Wheels and tires
Vehicle features and options Only check the tire inflation pressure when the
tires are cold. This means after driving no more
This chapter describes all standard, countrythan 1.25 miles/2 km or when the vehicle has
specific and optional features offered with the
been parked for at least 2 hours.
series. It also describes features that are not
The displays of inflation devices may undernecessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
read by up to 1.45 psi/0.1 bar.
the selected options or country versions. This
For Flat Tire Monitor: after correcting the tire
also applies to safety-related functions and
inflation pressure, reinitialize the Flat Tire
systems. The respectively applicable country
Monitor.
provisions must be observed when using the
respective features and systems. For Tire Pressure Monitor: after correcting the
tire inflation pressure, reset the Tire Pressure
Monitor.
Tire inflation pressure
Tire inflation pressure specifications
Safety information
The tire inflation pressure table, refer to
The tire characteristics and tire inflation pres  page 174, contains all tire inflation pressure
sure influence the following: specifications for the specified tire sizes at the
ambient temperature. Tire inflation pressure
  The service life of the tires.
specifications apply to approved tire sizes and
  Road safety.
recommended tire brands. This information
  Driving comfort. can be obtained from your service center.
To identify the correct tire inflation pressure,
Checking the tire inflation pressure
please note the following:
Check the tire inflation pressure regularly   Tire sizes of your vehicle.
Regularly check the tire inflation pres 
sure, and correct it as needed: at least twice a Tire fill pressures
month and before a long trip. If you fail to ob  To achieve optimum driving comfort, note the
serve this precaution, you may be driving on pressure specifications in the Tire inflation
tires with incorrect tire pressures, a condition pressure table, refer to page 174, and adjust
that may not only compromise your vehicle's as needed.
driving stability, but also lead to tire damage
and the risk of an accident. 
Tires have a natural, consistent loss of tire in 
flation pressure.
Tires heat up while driving, and the tire infla 
tion pressure increases along with the tire's
temperature. The tire inflation pressure speci 
fications relate to cold tires or tires with the
ambient temperature.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 174
Mobility Wheels and tires
Tire identification marks
Tire size
245/45 R 18 96 Y
245: nominal width in mm
45: aspect ratio in %
R: radial tire code
18: rim diameter in inches
These pressure values can also be found on
96: load rating, not for ZR tires
the tire inflation pressure label on the driver's
side on the rear door. Y: speed rating, before the R on ZR tires
Maximum permissible speed Speed letter
Do not exceed 100 mph/160 km/h; other  Q = up to 100 mph, 160 km/h
wise, tire damage and accidents may result. 
R = up to 106 mph, 170 km/h
S = up to 112 mph, 180 km/h
Tire inflation pressure values
T = up to 118 mph, 190 km/h
i3 H = up to 131 mph, 210 km/h
V = up to 150 mph, 240 km/h
Tire size Pressure specifications
W = up to 167 mph, 270 km/h
in bar/PSI
Y = up to 186 mph, 300 km/h
Specifications in
bar/PSI with cold Tire Identification Number
tires
DOT code: DOT xxxx xxx 0115
xxxx: manufacturer code for the tire brand
155/70 R 19 84 Q 2.3 / 33 2.8 / 41 xxx: tire size and tire design
M+S A/S Std
0115: tire age
155/70 R 19 84 Q
Tires with DOT codes meet the guidelines of
M+S Std
the U.S. Department of Transportation.
Front: 155/70 R 2.3 / 33 -
Tire age
19 84 Q M+S A/S
- 2.8 / 41
Std DOT   0115: the tire was manufactured in the
1st week of 2015.
Rear: 175/60 R 19
86 Q M+S A/S Std
Recommendation
Front: 155/60 R 2.3 / 33 -
Regardless of wear and tear, replace tires at
20 80 Q Std
- 2.8 / 41 least every 6 years.
Rear: 175/55 R 20
85 Q Std

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 175
Wheels and tires Mobility
Uniform Tire Quality Grading Temperature
Quality grades can be found where applicable The temperature grades are A, the highest, B,
on the tire sidewall between tread shoulder and C, representing the tire's resistance to the
and maximum section width. generation of heat and its ability to dissipate
heat when tested under controlled conditions
For example: Treadwear 200; Traction AA;
on a specified indoor laboratory test wheel.
Temperature A
Sustained high temperature can cause the ma 
terial of the tire to degenerate and reduce tire
DOT Quality Grades
life, and excessive temperature can lead to
Treadwear
sudden tire failure. The grade C corresponds
Traction AA A B C to a level of performance which all passenger
Temperature A B C car tires must meet under the Federal Motor
Vehicle Safety Standard No. 109. Grades Band
All passenger car tires must conform to Fed 
A represent higher levels of performance on
eral Safety Requirements in addition to these
the laboratory test wheel than the minimum re 
grades.
quired by law.
Treadwear Temperature grade for this tire
The treadwear grade is a comparative rating The temperature grade for this tire is es 
based on the wear rate of the tire when tested tablished for a tire that is properly inflated and
under controlled conditions on a specified gov  not overloaded. Excessive speed, underinfla 
ernment test course. For example, a tire tion, or excessive loading, either separately or
graded 150 would wear one and one-half, 1 g, in combination, can cause heat buildup and
times as well on the government course as a possible tire failure.
tire graded 100. The relative performance of
If necessary, have the vehicle towed. 
tires depends upon the actual conditions of
their use, however, and may depart signifi 
M+S
cantly from the norm due to variations in driv 
ing habits, service practices and differences in Winter and all-season tires with better cold
road characteristics and climate. weather performance than summer tires.
Traction
Tire tread
The traction grades, from highest to lowest,
are AA, A, B, and C.
Summer tires
Those grades represent the tire's ability to
Do not drive with a tire tread depth of less than
stop on wet pavement as measured under
0.12 in/3 mm.
controlled conditions on specified government
test surfaces of asphalt and concrete. A tire There is an increased danger of hydroplaning if
marked C may have poor traction performance. the tire tread depth is less than 0.12 in/3 mm.
The traction grade assigned to this tire is
Winter tires
based on straight-ahead braking traction tests,
and does not include acceleration, cornering, Do not drive with a tire tread depth of less than
hydroplaning, or peak traction characteristics. 0.16 in/4 mm.
Below a tread depth of 0.16 in/4 mm, tires are
less suitable for winter operation.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 176
Mobility Wheels and tires
Minimum tread depth In case of tire damage
If there are indications of tire damage, re 
duce your speed immediately and have the
rims and tires checked right away; otherwise,
there is the increased risk of an accident.
Drive carefully to the nearest service center. If
necessary, have the vehicle towed or trans 
ported there. Otherwise, tire damage can be 
come life threatening for vehicle occupants
and also other traffic. 
Wear indicators are distributed around the
Repair of tire damage
tire's circumference and have the legally re 
For safety reasons, the manufacturer of
quired minimum height of 0.063 in/1.6 mm.
your vehicle recommends that you do not have
They are marked on the side of the tire with damaged tires repaired; they should be re 
TWI, Tread Wear Indicator. placed. Otherwise, damage can occur as a re 
sult. 
Tire damage
Changing wheels and tires
General information
Inspect your tires often for damage, foreign Mounting
objects lodged in the tread, and tread wear.
Information on mounting tires
Have mounting and balancing performed
Hints
only by a service center.
Driving over rough or damaged road surfaces,
If work is not carried out properly, there is a
as well as debris, curbs and other obstacles
danger of subsequent damage and related
can cause serious damage to wheels, tires and
safety hazards. 
suspension parts. This is more likely to occur
with low-profile tires, which provide less cush 
ioning between the wheel and the road. Be Wheel and tire combination
careful to avoid road hazards and reduce your
You can ask the service center about the right
speed, especially if your vehicle is equipped
wheel/tire combination and wheel rim versions
with low-profile tires.
for the vehicle.
Indications of tire damage or other vehicle de 
Incorrect wheel and tire combinations impair
fects:
the function of a variety of systems such as
  Unusual vibrations while driving. ABS or DSC.
  Unusual handling such as a strong ten  To maintain good handling and vehicle re 
dency to pull to the left or right. sponse, use only tires with a single tread con 
figuration from a single manufacturer.
Damage can, e. g., be caused by driving over
curbs, road damage, or similar things. Following tire damage, have the original wheel
and tire combination remounted on the vehicle
as soon as possible.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 177
Wheels and tires Mobility
Approved wheels and tires Retreaded tires
You should only use wheels and tires Possibly substantial variations in the de 
that have been approved by the vehicle manu  sign and age of the tire casing structures can
facturer for your vehicle type; otherwise, e.g., limit service life and have a negative impact on
despite having the same official size ratings, road safety. 
variations can lead to chassis contact and with
it, the risk of severe accidents
Winter tires
The manufacturer of your vehicle cannot eval 
Winter tires are recommended for operating on
uate non-approved wheels and tires to deter 
winter roads.
mine if they are suited for use, and therefore
Although so-called all-season M+S tires pro 
cannot guarantee the operating safety of the
vide better winter traction than summer tires,
vehicle. 
they do not provide the same level of perform 
ance as winter tires.
Recommended tire brands
Maximum speed of winter tires
If the maximum speed of the vehicle is higher
than the permissible speed for the winter tires,
then a respective symbol is displayed in your
field of vision. You can obtain this sign from the
tire specialist or from your service center.
Maximum speed for winter tires
Do not exceed the maximum speed for
the respective winter tires; otherwise, tire dam 
For each tire size, the manufacturer of your ve 
age and accidents can occur. 
hicle recommends certain tire brands. These
can be identified by a star on the tire sidewall.
Rotating wheels between axles
With proper use, these tires meet the highest
Different wear patterns can occur on the front
standards for safety and handling.
and rear axles depending on individual driving
conditions. The tires can be rotated between
New tires
the axles to achieve even wear. Your service
Tire traction is not optimal due to manufactur  center will be glad to advise you. After rotating,
ing circumstances when tires are brand-new; check the tire pressure and correct if needed.
they achieve their full traction potential after a
Rotating the tires is not permissible on vehi 
break-in time.
cles with different tire sizes or rim sizes on the
Drive conservatively for the first front and rear axles.
200 miles/300 km.
Storage
Retreaded tires
Store wheels and tires in a cool, dry place with
The manufacturer of your vehicle does not rec  as little exposure to light as possible.
ommend the use of retreaded tires.
Always protect tires against all contact with oil,
grease and fuels.
Do not exceed the maximum tire inflation pres 
sure indicated on the side wall of the tire.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 178
Mobility Wheels and tires
Mobility System Sealing container
The concept
With the Mobility System, minor tire damage
can be sealed quickly to enable continued
travel. To accomplish this, sealant is pumped
into the tires, which seals the damage from the
inside.
The compressor can be used to check the tire
inflation pressure.
  Sealing container, arrow 1.
Hints
  Filling hose, arrow 2.
  Follow the instructions on using the Mobi 
Observe use-by date on the sealant container.
lity System found on the compressor and
sealant container.
Compressor
  Use of the Mobility System may be ineffec 
tive if the tire puncture measures approx.
1/8 in/4 mm or more.
  Contact the nearest service center if the
tire cannot be made drivable.
  If possible, do not remove foreign bodies
that have penetrated the tire.
  Pull the speed limit sticker off the sealant
container and apply it to the steering
wheel.
1 On/off reel
  The use of a sealant can damage the TPM
2 Holder for bottle
wheel electronics. In this case, have the
electronics checked at the next opportu  3 Reduce inflation pressure
nity and have them replaced if needed. 4 Inflation pressure dial
5 Compressor
Storage
6 Connector/cable for socket
The mobility system is located in the storage
7 Connection hose -- stowed in the bottom
compartment under the hood.
of the compressor

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 179
Wheels and tires Mobility
Filling the tire with sealant 4. Slide the sealing container upright into the
holder on the compressor housing, ensur 
1. Shake the sealing container.
ing that it engages audibly.
2. Take the connection hose completely out
5. Screw the connection hose onto the tire
of the compressor housing. Do not kink the
valve of the defective wheel.
hose.
6. With the compressor switched off, insert
3. Attach the connection hose to the connec 
the plug into a power socket inside the ve 
tor of the sealing container, ensuring that it
hicle.
engages audibly.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 180
Mobility Wheels and tires
7. With operating readiness or drive readi  3. Wrap the empty sealant container and con 
ness switched on, reel on the compressor. nection hose in suitable material to avoid
dirtying the cargo area.
4. Stow the Mobility System back in the vehi 
cle.
Distributing the sealant
Immediately drive approx. 5 miles/10 km to en 
sure that the sealant is evenly distributed in the
tire.
Do not exceed a speed of 50 mph/80 km/h.
Switch off the compressor after 10 mi  If possible, do not drive at speeds less than
nutes 12 mph/20 km/h.
Do not allow the compressor to run longer than
To correct the tire inflation pressure
10 minutes; otherwise, the device will overheat
and may be damaged.  1. Stop at a suitable location.
Let the compressor run for approx. 3 to 8 mi  2. Screw the connection hose onto the tire
nutes to fill the tire with sealant and achieve a valve stem.
tire inflation pressure of approx. 2.5 bar.
While the tire is being filled with sealant, the
tire inflation pressure may sporadically reach
approx. 5 bar. Do not reel off the compressor at
this point.
If a tire inflation pressure of 2 bar is not
reached:
1. Switch off the compressor.
2. Unscrew the filling hose from the wheel.
3. Attach the connection hose directly to the
3. Drive 33 ft/10 m forward and back to dis  compressor.
tribute the sealant in the tire.
4. Inflate the tire again using the compressor.
If a tire inflation pressure of 2 bar cannot be
reached, contact your service center.
Stowing the Mobility System
1. Remove the connection hose of the seal 
ant container from the wheel.
2. Remove the connection hose from the
sealant container.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 181
Wheels and tires Mobility
4. Insert the connector into a power socket Follow the snow chain manufacturer's instruc 
inside the vehicle. tions.
Make sure that the snow chains are always
sufficiently tight. Retighten as needed accord 
ing to the chain manufacturer's instructions.
Do not initialize the Flat Tire Monitor after
mounting snow chains, as doing so may result
in incorrect readings.
Do not initialize the Tire Pressure Monitor after
mounting snow chains, as doing so may result
in incorrect readings.
5. Correct the tire inflation pressure to
When driving with snow chains, briefly activate
2.5 bar.
Dynamic Traction Control if needed.
  Increase pressure: with operating read 
iness or drive readiness switched on, Maximum speed with snow chains
reel on the compressor.
Do not exceed a speed of 30 mph/50 km/h
  To reduce the pressure: press the but  when using snow chains.
ton on the compressor.
Continuing the trip
Do not exceed the maximum permissible
speed of 50 mph/80 km/h.
Reinitialize the Flat Tire Monitor.
Reinitialize the Tire Pressure Monitor.
Replace the defective tire and the sealant con 
tainer of the Mobility System as soon as possi 
ble.
Snow chains
Fine-link snow chains
Only certain types of fine-link snow chains
have been tested by the manufacturer of the
vehicle, classified as road-safe and approved.
Information about the approved snow chains
are available from the service center.
Use
Use only in pairs on the rear wheels, equipped
with the tires of the following size:
  155/70 R 19

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 182
Mobility Under the hood
Under the hood
What is important under the hood
1 Washer fluid reservoir 3 Coolant reservoir for climate control
2 With Range Extender: filler flap emergency 4 Coolant reservoir for drive
unlocking
The occasional use cable compartment in the If you are unfamiliar with the statutory guide 
center is used for storage of the Level 1 charg  lines, have any work on the vehicle performed
ing cable and the Level 2 charging cable. only by a service center.
Moisture can penetrate into the occasional use If work is not carried out properly, there is a
cable compartment, e.g. in a car wash. danger of subsequent damage and related
safety hazards. 
Hood Fold down wiper arm
Before opening the hood, ensure that the
Hints wiper arms are against the windshield, or this
may result in damage. 
Working under the hood
Never attempt to perform any service or
repair operations on your vehicle without the
necessary professional technical training.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 183
Under the hood Mobility
Opening hood Danger of jamming
Make sure that the closing path of the
Unlocking hood
hood is clear; otherwise, injuries may result. 
1. Press button on the remote con 
trol or in the driver's footwell, refer to
page 44.
Opening hood
1. Press the release handle and open the
hood.
Indicator/warning lights
When the hood is opened, a Check Control
message is displayed.
Closing the hood
From approx. 16 in/40 cm height allow to fall
and press again to lock the hook completely.
Make sure you hear the hood engage.
Hood open when driving
If you see any signs that the hood is not
completely closed while driving, pull over im 
mediately and close it securely. 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 184
Mobility Engine oil
Engine oil
Vehicle features and options 3. Remove the cargo floor panel.
This chapter describes all standard, countryspecific and optional features offered with the
series. It also describes features that are not
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
the selected options or country versions. This
also applies to safety-related functions and
systems. The respectively applicable country
provisions must be observed when using the
respective features and systems.
4. Turn the lid counterclockwise and remove.
General information
Engine oil consumption depends on the fre 
quency of Range Extender use. Therefore,
regularly check the engine oil level after refuel 
ing.
Checking the oil level
5. After approx. 5, minutes, remove the dip
Note stick and wipe with a lint-free cloth, paper
Check the engine oil level with Range Extender towel or similar.
warmed up to operating temperature.
After switching off the Range Extender, wait
several minutes before checking the oil level
so that the engine oil can collect in the oil pan.
Checking
1. Park the vehicle in horizontal position in a
safe place.
2. Switch the engine off.
6. Carefully insert the dipstick up to the stop
in the measuring tube, and pull it back out.
The engine oil level must be between the
two marks of the dipstick.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 185
Engine oil Mobility
Adding or changing engine
oil
If necessary, have engine oil added or changed
by the service center.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 186
Mobility Coolant
Coolant
Vehicle features and options
This chapter describes all standard, countryspecific and optional features offered with the
series. It also describes features that are not
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
the selected options or country versions. This
also applies to safety-related functions and
systems. The respectively applicable country
provisions must be observed when using the
1 Coolant reservoir for climate control
respective features and systems.
2 Coolant reservoir for drive
Hints
Coolant level
Danger of burns from hot engine
Do not open the cooling system while
Coolant reservoir for climate control
the engine is hot; otherwise, esliding coolant
may cause burns. 
Checking
Suitable additives 1. Allow the drive to cool down.
Only use suitable additives; otherwise, 2. Turn the lid of the coolant reservoir slightly
engine damage may occur. The additives are counterclockwise to allow any excess
harmful to your health.  pressure to dissipate, then open it.
Coolant consists of water and additives.
The vehicle's cooling circuits are filled with dif 
ferent types of coolant. Do not mix the differ 
ent types of coolant.
Not all commercially available additives are
suitable for the vehicle. Information about the
suitable additives are available from the service
center.
3. Check the coolant level.
Coolant reservoir The coolant level is correct if it lies be 
tween the minimum and maximum marks
The vehicle has two coolant reservoirs that are
in the reservoir.
located under the hood.
To ensure the operational reliability of the vehi  Adding
cle, always check the coolant level of both
1. Slowly add coolant up to the specified
coolant reservoirs.
level; do not overfill.
Open hood, refer to page 183.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 187
Coolant Mobility
2. Close cap.
3. Have the cause of the coolant loss elimi 
nated by the service center as soon as
possible.
Coolant reservoir for drive
Checking
1. Allow the drive to cool down.
2. Check the coolant level.
The marks are on the side of the coolant
reservoir. The coolant level is correct if it
lies between the minimum and maximum
marks.
Adding
1. Turn the lid of the coolant reservoir slightly
counterclockwise to allow any excess
pressure to dissipate, then open it.
2. Slowly add coolant up to the specified
level; do not overfill.
3. Close cap.
4. Have the cause of the coolant loss elimi 
nated by the service center as soon as
possible.
Disposal
Comply with the relevant environmen 
tal protection regulations when dispos 
ing of coolant and coolant additives.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 188
Mobility Maintenance
Maintenance
Vehicle features and options Condition Based Service
CBS
This chapter describes all standard, countryspecific and optional features offered with the
Sensors and special algorithms take into ac 
series. It also describes features that are not
count the driving conditions of your vehicle.
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
Based on this, Condition Based Service recog 
the selected options or country versions. This
nizes the maintenance requirements.
also applies to safety-related functions and
The system makes it possible to adapt the
systems. The respectively applicable country
amount of maintenance corresponding to your
provisions must be observed when using the
user profile.
respective features and systems.
Detailed information on service requirements,
refer to page 83, can be displayed on the Con 
BMW maintenance system trol Display.
The maintenance system indicates required Service data in the remote control
maintenance measures, and thereby provides
Information on the required maintenance is
support in maintaining road safety and the op 
continuously stored in the remote control.
erational reliability of the vehicle.
Your service center will read out this data and
In some cases scopes and intervals may vary suggest the right array of service procedures
according to the country-specific version. Re  for your vehicle.
placement work, spare parts, fuels and lubri 
Therefore, hand your service specialist the re 
cants and wear materials are calculated sepa 
mote control with which the vehicle was driven
rately. Additional information is available from
most recently.
the service center.
Storage periods
Storage periods during which the vehicle bat 
Note
tery was disconnected are not taken into ac 
Maintenance and repairs count.
Have maintenance and repair work per  If this occurs, have a service center update the
formed only by a service center or a workshop time-dependent maintenance procedures,
that works according to BMW specifications such as checking brake fluid and, if needed,
with appropriately trained personnel. Other  changing the engine oil and the microfilter/
wise, there is the risk of fatal injury from elec  activated-charcoal filter.
trocution due to the high-voltage system's
high voltage. 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 189
Maintenance Mobility
Service and Warranty Position
Information Booklet for US
models and Warranty and
Service Guide Booklet for
Canadian models
Please consult your Service and Warranty In 
formation Booklet for US models and Warranty
and Service Guide Booklet for Canadian mod 
els for additional information on service re 
quirements. Located on the driver's side is an OBD socket
Maintenance and repair should be performed for reading the vehicle data. On vehicles with
by your service center. Make sure to have reg  Range Extender, additional components are
ular maintenance procedures recorded in the checked that are critical for its emissions mix.
vehicle's Service and Warranty Information
Booklet for US models, and in the Warranty
Emissions
and Service Guide Booklet for Canadian mod 
Applies to vehicles with Range Extender.
els. These entries are proof of regular mainte 
nance.   The warning lamp lights up:
Emissions are deteriorating. Have
the vehicle checked as soon as
Socket for OBD Onboard
possible.
Diagnosis
  The warning lamp flashes under certain
circumstances:
Note
This indicates that there is excessive mis 
Socket for Onboard Diagnosis firing in the engine.
The socket for onboard diagnostics may Reduce the vehicle speed and have the
only be used by the service center or a work  system checked immediately; otherwise,
shop that operates in accordance with the serious engine misfiring within a brief pe 
specifications of the vehicle manufacturer with riod can seriously damage emission con 
correspondingly trained personnel and other trol components, in particular the catalytic
authorized persons. Otherwise, use may result converter.
in operating problems for the vehicle. 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 190
Mobility Replacing components
Replacing components
Vehicle features and options 4. Remove the wiper blade toward one side.
This chapter describes all standard, countryspecific and optional features offered with the
series. It also describes features that are not
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
the selected options or country versions. This
also applies to safety-related functions and
systems. The respectively applicable country
provisions must be observed when using the
respective features and systems.
5. Insert the new wiper blade in reverse order
of removal until it locks in place.
Wiper blade replacement
6. Fold down the wipers.
Hints Rear: replacing the wiper blades
Do not fold down the wipers without 1. Lift off the wiper fully and pull off the wiper
wiper blades blade, arrow.
Do not fold down the wipers if wiper blades
have not been installed; this may damage the
windshield. 
Front: Replacing the wiper blades
1. To change the wiper blades, fold up, refer
to page 74, the wiper arms.
2. Fold up the wipers.
2. Attach a new wiper blade. It must engage
audibly.
3. Fold down the wipers.
Lamp and bulb replacement
Hints
3. Position the wiper blade in a horizontal po 
Lights and bulbs
sition.
Lights and bulbs make an essential contribu 
tion to vehicle safety.
The manufacturer of the vehicle recommends
that you entrust corresponding procedures to

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 191
Replacing components Mobility
the service center if you are unfamiliar those or If the headlights do not dim despite driving
if they have not been described here. with the light switched on, increasing humidity
forms, e. g. water droplets in the light, have the
You can obtain a selection of replacement
service center check this.
bulbs at the service center.
Danger of burns
Headlight setting
Only change bulbs when they are cool;
The headlight adjustments can be affected by
otherwise, there is a danger of getting
changing lights and bulbs. Have the head 
burned. 
lights' settings checked and corrected by serv 
ice after a replacement.
Working on the lighting system
When working on the lighting system,
Front lights, bulb replacement
you should always reel off the lights affected to
prevent short circuits.
At a glance
To avoid possible injury or equipment damage
when replacing bulbs, observe any instructions Halogen headlights
provided by the bulb manufacturer. 
Do not touch the bulbs
Do not touch the glass of new bulbs with
your bare hands, as even minute amounts of
contamination will burn into the bulb's surface
and reduce its service life.
Use a clean tissue, cloth or something similar,
or hold the bulb by its base. 
1 Parking lights / daytime running lights
Light-emitting diodes (LEDs)
2 Low beams
Some items of equipment use light-emitting
diodes installed behind a cover as a light
Halogen headlights with LED lighting
source.
elements
These light-emitting diodes, which are related
to conventional lasers, are officially designated
as Class 1 light-emitting diodes.
Do not remove the covers
Do not remove the covers, and never
stare into the unfiltered light for several hours;
otherwise, irritation of the retina could result. 
Headlight glass
Condensation can form on the inside of the ex  1 Parking lights / daytime running lights
ternal lights in cool or humid weather. When
2 Low beams
driving with the light switched on, the conden 
sation evaporates after a short time. The head 
light glass does not need to be changed.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 192
Mobility Replacing components
Low beams 6. To insert the bulb and bulb holder, proceed
in reverse order of removal. Make sure that
Follow general instructions, refer to page 190.
the bulb holder snaps into place.
55-watt bulb, H7.
7. Close the headlight housing with the lid.
1. Fold up cover in front of the headlights. Make sure that the lid engages.
LED headlights
Hints
With LED headlamps, all front lights and park 
ing lights/daytime running lights are designed
with LED technology.
Contact your service center in the event of a
malfunction.
2. Turn the lid counterclockwise and remove.
At a glance
3. Pull off the connector.
1 Parking lights / daytime running lights
2 Low beams
Parking lights/daytime running lights
Parking lights/daytime running lights are de 
signed with LED technology.
Contact your service center in the event of a
malfunction.
4. Press bulb holder slightly inward, loosen it
Turn signal and high beams
to the right from the anchor and fold it
Follow general instructions, refer to page 190.
down.
5. Turn the bulb counterclockwise and re 
move.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 193
Replacing components Mobility
Access High beams
55-watt bulb, H11.
1. Turn the right bulb holder counterclock 
wise and remove.
In the wheel house, turn the cover counter 
clockwise and remove it.
Turn signal
2. Press the bulb gently into the socket, turn
24-watt bulb, PSY24W. counterclockwise and remove.
1. Turn the left bulb holder counterclockwise 3. Install the new bulb and bulb holder in re 
and remove. verse order of removal.
4. Attach the cover to the wheel house.
Turn signal in exterior mirror
Follow general instructions, refer to page 190.
The turn signals in the exterior mirrors feature
LED technology. Contact your service center
in the event of a malfunction.
Tail lights, bulb replacement
2. Press the bulb gently into the socket, turn Follow the general instructions on lamps and
counterclockwise and remove. bulbs, refer to page 190.
3. Install the new bulb and bulb holder in re  The tail lights in the tailgate feature LED tech 
verse order of removal. nology.
4. Attach the cover to the wheel house. The lights in the bumper include the function
of the rear fog lamp and the reverse gear lights.
In addition, the lights in the bumper assume
the function of the tail lights if the tailgate is
opened.
Contact your service center in the event of a
malfunction.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 194
Mobility Replacing components
Changing wheels After a battery replacement, have the battery
registered on the vehicle by the service center
Hints to ensure that all comfort features are fully
available and that any Check Control mes 
Which is why no spare tire is available.
sages of these comfort features are no longer
The tools for changing wheels are available as
displayed.
accessories from your service center.
Charge vehicle battery
Jacking points for the vehicle jack
Do not use any charging devices
Do not charge the vehicle battery with an
external charging device; otherwise, there is a
risk of property damage, e. g., to the vehicle's
electronics. 
Charging a discharged battery, refer to
page 168.
Power failure
The jacking points for the vehicle jack are lo  After a temporary power loss, some equipment
cated at the positions shown. needs to be newly initialized or individual set 
tings updated, e. g.:
  Time: update.
Vehicle battery   Date: update.
  Glass sunroof and sliding visor: initialize
The vehicle battery has 12 volts. The battery
the system, refer to page 52.
supplies the onboard electronics with energy.
Information about the high-voltage system, re 
Disposing of old batteries
fer to page 160.
Have old batteries disposed of by your
Maintenance service center or bring them to a recy 
cling center.
The battery is maintenance-free.
Maintain the battery in an upright position for
The added amount of acid is sufficient for the
transport and storage. Secure the battery so
service life of the battery.
that it does not tip over during transport.
Further information about the battery can be
obtained from your service center.
Fuses
Battery replacement
Use approved vehicle batteries only
Hints
Only use vehicle batteries that have been
Replacing fuses
approved for your vehicle by the manufacturer;
otherwise, the vehicle could be damaged and Never attempt to repair a blown fuse and
systems or functions may not be fully availa  do not replace a defective fuse with a substi 
ble.  tute of another color or amperage rating; this

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 195
Replacing components Mobility
could lead to a circuit overload, ultimately re 
sulting in a fire in the vehicle. 
Replacing fuse
The fuses are located in the passenger foot 
well under the dashboard.
1. To open, loosen screws, arrow 1.
2. Fold down the fuse holder, arrow 2.
Information on the fuse types and locations
is found on a separate sheet.
3. Replace the fuse in question.
4. The installation is done in reverse order
from the removal.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 196
Mobility Breakdown assistance
Breakdown assistance
Vehicle features and options Hints
Emergency Request not guaranteed
This chapter describes all standard, countryspecific and optional features offered with the For technical reasons, the Emergency
series. It also describes features that are not Request cannot be guaranteed under unfavor 
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to able conditions. 
the selected options or country versions. This
also applies to safety-related functions and Overview
systems. The respectively applicable country
provisions must be observed when using the
respective features and systems.
Hazard warning flashers
SOS button in the roofliner
Requirements
  The SIM card integrated in the vehicle has
been activated.
The button is located in the center console.   The radio-ready state is switched on.
  The Assist system is functional.
Intelligent Emergency Initiating an Emergency Request
Request 1. Press the cover briefly to open it.
2. Press the SOS button until the LED at the
The concept button lights up green.
In case of an emergency, an Emergency Re    The LED lights up green: an Emergency
quest can be made through this system. Request was initiated.
If a cancel prompt appears on the display,
General information
the Emergency Request can be aborted.
Only press the SOS button in an emergency.
If the situation allows, wait in your vehicle
until the voice connection has been estab 
lished.
  The LED flashes green when a connection
to the BMW Response Center has been
established.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 197
Breakdown assistance Mobility
When the emergency request is received First aid kit
at the BMW Response Center, the BMW
Response Center contacts you and takes Note
further steps to help you.
Some of the articles have a limited service life.
Even if you are unable to respond, the
Check the expiration dates of the contents
BMW Response Center can take further
regularly and replace any expired items
steps to help you under certain circum 
promptly.
stances.
For this, data are transmitted to the BMW Storage
Response Center which serve to deter 
The first aid kit is located at the rear of the
mine the necessary rescue measures. E. g.
trunk.
the current position of the vehicle, if it can
be established.
  If the LED is flashing green, but the BMW Jump-starting
Response Center can no longer be heard
via the speaker, you can nevertheless still Not jumping or directly charging the ve 
be heard at the BMW Response Center. hicle battery
Do not jump or directly charge the vehicle bat 
Initiating an Emergency Request
tery using conventional jump starting; other 
automatically
wise, because of the high voltage of the drive
Under certain conditions, an Emergency Re  system, there is a danger of fatal injury from
quest is automatically initiated immediately af  electrocution. 
ter a severe accident. Automatic Collision Noti 
If the high-voltage battery and the vehicle bat 
fication is not affected by pressing the SOS
tery are discharged, it is not possible to oper 
button.
ate the vehicle. In this case, do not give a jump
start, but instead charge the battery as usual
using the charging cable, refer to page 168.
Warning triangle
Towing
Note
Tow-starting and towing
For tow-starting or towing, switch off the
Intelligent Safety systems; otherwise malfunc 
tions of the individual braking systems might
lead to accidents. 
The warning triangle is located on the inside of
the tailgate.
To remove, loosen the bracket.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 198
Mobility Breakdown assistance
Transporting your vehicle 3. Engage selector lever position N.
If there are electrical malfunctions, it may hap 
Note
pen that you can't change the selector lever
Your vehicle is not permitted to be towed. position.
Therefore, contact a service center in the
event of a breakdown. Towing other vehicles
Do not have the vehicle towed
Hints
Have your vehicle transported on a load 
Light towing vehicle
ing platform only; otherwise, damage may oc 
cur.  The towing vehicle must not be lighter
than the vehicle being towed; otherwise, it will
not be possible to control the vehicle's re 
Tow truck
sponse. 
Attaching the tow bar/tow rope correctly
Attach the tow bar or tow rope to the tow
fitting; connecting it to other vehicle parts may
cause damage. 
  Switch on the hazard warning system, de 
pending on local regulations.
  If the electrical system has failed, clearly
identify the vehicle being towed by placing
The vehicle should only be transported on a
a sign or a warning triangle in the rear win 
loading platform.
dow.
Do not lift the vehicle
Tow bar
Do not lift the vehicle by the tow fitting or
body and chassis parts; otherwise, damage The tow fittings used should be on the same
may result.  side on both vehicles.
Should it prove impossible to avoid mounting
Use tow fitting located in the front only for po 
the tow bar at an offset angle, please observe
sitioning the vehicle.
the following:
Pushing vehicle   Maneuvering capability is limited going
around corners.
To remove a disabled vehicle from the danger
area, push it for a short distance at a speed of   The tow bar will generate lateral forces if it
no more than 6 mph/10 km/h. is secured with an offset.
The vehicle can only be pushed in selector
Tow rope
lever position N.
When starting to tow the vehicle, make sure
In order to ensure that the vehicle can roll, pro 
that the tow rope is taut.
ceed as follows:
To avoid jerking and the associated stresses
1. Switch on drive readiness, refer to
on the vehicle components when towing, al 
page 64.
ways use nylon ropes or nylon straps.
2. Depress brake pedal.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 199
Breakdown assistance Mobility
Tow fitting there is the risk of fatal injury from electrocu 
tion due to the system's high voltage. 
The screw-in tow fitting should always be car 
ried in the vehicle.
Esliding fluids
The tow fitting can be screwed in at the front
Do not touch any fluids esliding from the
or rear of the BMW.
high-voltage battery, or the skin can sustain
The tow fitting is located in the storage com  chemical burns. 
partment under the hood.
Tow fitting, information on use General information
  Use only the tow fitting provided with If you are involved in an accident with your ve 
the vehicle and screw it all the way in. hicle, compliance with the following additional
safety precautions is required with regard to
  Use the tow fitting for towing on paved
the high-voltage system:
roads only.
  Secure the crash site.
  Use tow fitting located in the front only for
positioning the vehicle.   Immediately notify rescue forces, police, or
firefighters of the fact that your vehicle is
  Avoid lateral loading of the tow fitting, e.g.,
equipped with a high-voltage system.
do not lift the vehicle by the tow fitting.
  Engage selector lever position P, set the
Otherwise, damage to the tow fitting and the
parking brake and reel off operating and
vehicle can occur. 
drive readiness.
  Lock the vehicle after exiting.
Screw thread for tow fitting
  Do not inhale any gases esliding from the
high-voltage battery; if needed, maintain a
safe distance from the vehicle.
Press on the mark on the edge of the cover to
push it out.
What to do after an accident
Hints
After an accident
After an accident, do not touch any highvoltage components such as orange colored
high-voltage cables or parts that are in contact
with exposed high-voltage cables. Otherwise,

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 200
Mobility Care
Care
Vehicle features and options Follow the user's manual for the high-pressure
washer. 
This chapter describes all standard, countryspecific and optional features offered with the Cleaning sensors/camera lenses with
series. It also describes features that are not high-pressure washers
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
When using high-pressure washers, do not
the selected options or country versions. This
spray the sensors and camera lenses on the
also applies to safety-related functions and
outside of the vehicle for long periods and
systems. The respectively applicable country
maintain a distance of at least 12 in/30 cm. 
provisions must be observed when using the
respective features and systems. Have the charging port cleaned by
trained personnel
If the charging port is dirty, have the car
Car washes
cleaned only by appropriately trained person 
nel. Otherwise, there is a danger of injury from
General information high voltage. 
Regularly remove foreign objects such as
leaves in the area below the windshield when Automatic car washes
the hood is raised.
Hints
Wash your vehicle frequently, particularly in
winter. Intense soiling and road salt can dam 
Do not use high pressure washing sys 
age the vehicle.
tems
With washing systems operating at high pres 
Hints
sures and nozzle positions close to the win 
Closing the charging port flap dows, drops of water can penetrate. 
Close the charging port flap while wash 
  Give preference to cloth car washes or
ing the vehicle. Otherwise, the vehicle could be
those that use soft brushes in order to
damaged. 
avoid paint damage.
Steam jets or high-pressure washers   Make sure that the wheels and tires are not
damaged by the transport mechanisms.
When using steam jets or high-pressure
washers, hold them a sufficient distance away   Fold in the exterior mirrors; otherwise, they
and use a maximum temperature of may be damaged, depending on the width
140  /60  . of the vehicle.
If the vehicle has a glass sunroof and charging   Unscrew the rod antenna.
port flap, ensure that a distance of at least   Deactivate the rain sensor, refer to
31.5 inches/80 cm is maintained. Holding them page 73, to avoid unintentional wiper acti 
too close or using excessively high pressures vation.
or temperatures can cause damage or prelimi 
  In some cases, an unintentional alarm can
nary damage that may then lead to long-term
be triggered by the interior motion sensor
damage.
of the alarm system. Follow the instruc 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 201
Care Mobility
tions on avoiding an unintentional alarm, After washing the vehicle
refer to page 50.
After washing the vehicle, apply the brakes
Guide rails in car washes briefly to dry them; otherwise, braking action
can be reduced and corrosion of the brake
Avoid car washes with guide rails higher
discs can occur.
than 4 in/10 cm; otherwise, the vehicle body
could be damaged.  Completely remove all residues on the win 
dows, to minimize loss of visibility due to
smearing and to reduce wiper noises and
Before driving into a car wash
wiper blade wear.
In order to ensure that the vehicle can roll in a
car wash, take the following steps:
Vehicle care
1. Drive into the car wash.
2. Engage selector lever position N.
Car care products
3. Remove foot from brake pedal.
BMW recommends using care and cleaning
4. Press the Start/Stop button.
products from BMW, since these have been
In this way, operating readiness remains tested and approved.
switched on, and a Check-Control mes 
Car care and cleaning products
sage is displayed.
Follow the instructions on the container.
To activate drive readiness:
When cleaning the interior, open the doors or
1. Depress the brake pedal.
windows.
2. Press the Start/Stop button.
Only use products intended for cleaning vehi 
Pressing the Start/Stop button without step  cles.
ping on the brake turns operating readiness
Cleansers can contain substances that are
off.
dangerous and harmful to your health. 
Selector lever position
Vehicle paint
Selector lever position P is engaged automati 
Regular care contributes to driving safety and
cally:
value retention. Environmental influences in
  With operating readiness turned off.
areas with elevated air pollution or natural con 
  After approx. 15 minutes. taminants, such as tree resin or pollen can af 
fect the vehicle's paintwork. Tailor the fre 
Headlights quency and extent of your car care to these
influences.
  Do not rub dry and do not use abrasive or
acidic cleansers. Aggressive substances such as spilled fuel, oil,
grease or bird droppings, must be removed im 
  Soak areas that have been dirtied e. g.,
mediately to prevent the finish from being al 
from insects, with shampoo and wash off
tered or discolored.
with water.
  Thaw ice with de-icing spray; do not use an
Leather care
ice scraper.
Remove dust from the leather often, using a
cloth or vacuum cleaner.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 202
Mobility Care
Otherwise, particles of dust and road grime Chrome surfaces
chafe in pores and folds, and lead to increased
Carefully clean components such as the radia 
wear and premature degradation of the leather
tor grille or door handles with an ample supply
surface.
of water, possibly with shampoo added, partic 
To guard against discoloration, such as from ularly when they have been exposed to road
clothing, provide leather care roughly every salt.
two months.
Rubber components
Clean light-colored leather more frequently be 
cause soiling on such surfaces is substantially Aside from water, treat only with rubber
more visible. cleansers.
Use leather care products; otherwise, dirt and When cleaning rubber seals, do not use any
grease will gradually break down the protective silicon-containing car care products in order to
layer of the leather surface. avoid damage or noises.
Suitable care products are available from the
Fine wood parts
service center.
Clean fine wood facing and fine wood compo 
Upholstery material care nents only with a moist rag. Then dry with a
soft cloth.
Vacuum regularly with a vacuum cleaner.
If upholstery is very dirty, e.g., with beverage
Plastic components
stains, use a soft sponge or microfiber cloth
These include:
with a suitable interior cleaner.
  Imitation leather surfaces.
Clean the upholstery down to the seams using
large sweeping motions. Avoid rubbing the   Roofliner.
material vigorously.
  Lamp lenses.
Damage from Velcro  fasteners   Instrument cluster cover.
Open Velcro  fasteners on pants or   Matt black spray-coated components.
other articles of clothing can damage the seat
  Painted parts in the interior.
covers. Ensure that any Velcro  fasteners are
  Carbon parts in the interior.
closed. 
Clean with a microfiber cloth.
Caring for special components Dampen cloth lightly with water.
Do not soak the roofliner.
Light-alloy wheels
No cleansers that contain alcohol or sol 
When cleaning the vehicle, use only neutral
vents
wheel cleaners having a pH value from 5 to 9.
Do not use cleansers that contain alcohol or
Do not use abrasive cleaning agents or steam
solvents, such as lacquer thinners, heavy-duty
jets above 140  /60  . Follow the manufac 
grease removers, fuel, or such; this could lead
turer's instructions.
to surface damage. 
Aggressive, acidic or alkaline cleaning agents
can destroy the protective layer of adjacent
Safety belts
components, such as the brake disk.
Dirty belt straps impede the reeling action and
thus have a negative impact on safety.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 203
Care Mobility
Chemical cleaning Keeping out moisture
Do not clean chemically; this can destroy Keep all fluids and moisture away from
the webbing.  the unit; otherwise, electrical components can
be damaged. 
Use only a mild soapy solution, with the safety
belts clipped into their buckles. Avoid pressure
Do not allow the reels to retract the safety Avoid pressing too hard when cleaning
belts until they are dry. and do not use abrasive materials; otherwise,
damage can result. 
Carpets and floor mats
Clean with a clean, antistatic microfiber cloth.
No objects in the area around the pedals
Keep floor mats, carpets, and any other Long idle times and long-term vehicle
objects out of the pedal area; otherwise, the storage
function of the pedals could be impeded while
Do not allow the vehicle to sit idle for ex 
driving and create the risk of an accident.
tended periods with a low charging state
Do not place additional floor mats over existing
Before storing the vehicle for an extended pe 
mats or other objects.
riod, check the battery charge indicator to en 
Only use floor mats that have been approved sure that the high-voltage battery is fully
for the vehicle and can be properly attached to charged. For longer idle times, park the vehicle
floor. with a charging plug plugged into a suitable
Ensure that the floor mats are securely fas  power source. Regularly check charging state.
tened again after they were removed for clean  Otherwise, the high-voltage battery can be
ing, e.g.  damaged when there is excessive discharge. 
Floor mats can be removed from the car's inte  For idle phases that last several weeks, park
rior for cleaning. the vehicle with a fully charged battery if possi 
ble.
If the floor carpets are very dirty, clean with a
microfiber cloth and water or a textile cleaner. Do not park the vehicle for longer than 14 days
To prevent matting of the carpet, rub back and if the electric range is less than 6 mls, approx.
forth in the direction of travel only. 10 km.
With storage times of up to three months, if
Sensor/camera lenses
possible plug the vehicle into a suitable power
To clean sensors and camera lenses, use a source or park it in a nearly fully charged state.
cloth moistened with a small amount of glass
detergent. Note
The service center can advise you on what to
Displays/monitors
consider when storing the vehicle for longer
than three months.
Cleaning displays and screens
Do not use any chemical or household
cleaning agents; otherwise, surfaces can be af 
fected. 

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Reference
This chapter contains the technical data and an
index that will quickly take you to the information
you need.
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 206
Reference Technical data
Technical data
Vehicle features and options the selected options or country versions. This
also applies to safety-related functions and
This chapter describes all standard, countrysystems. The respectively applicable country
specific and optional features offered with the
provisions must be observed when using the
series. It also describes features that are not
respective features and systems.
necessarily available in your car, e. g., due to
Note
The technical data and specifications in this found in the approval documents, on informa 
Owner's Manual are used as guidance values. tion signs on the vehicle or can be obtained
The vehicle-specific data can deviate from this, from the service center.
for example, due to the selected special equip 
The information in the vehicle documents al 
ment, country version or country-specific
ways has priority.
measurement method. Detailed values can be
Dimensions
The dimensions can vary depending on the roof racks or spoiler. The heights can deviate,
model version, equipment or country-specific for example, due to the selected special equip 
measurement method. ment, tires, load and chassis version.
The specified heights do not take into account
attached parts, for example, a roof antenna,
BMW i3
Width with mirrors inches/mm 80.3/2,039
Width without mirrors inches/mm 69.9/1,775
Height inches/mm 62.1/1,578
Length inches/mm 157.8/4,008
Wheelbase inches/mm 101.2/2,570
Smallest turning radius diam. ft/m 32.4/9.86

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 207
Technical data Reference
Weights
BMW i3 without Range Extender
Approved gross vehicle weight lbs/kg 3,615/1,640
Load lbs/kg 715/324
Approved front axle load lbs/kg 1,720/780
Approved rear axle load lbs/kg 2,005/909
Cargo area capacity cu ft/l 15.1-36.9/260-1,100
BMW i3 with Range Extender
Approved gross vehicle weight lbs/kg 3,815/1,730
Load lbs/kg 650/295
Approved front axle load lbs/kg 1,785/810
Approved rear axle load lbs/kg 2,205/1,000
Cargo area capacity cu ft/l 15.1-36.9/260-1,100
Capacities
US gal/liters Notes
Fuel tank, approx. 1.9/7 With optional Range Ex 
tender

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 208
Reference Appendix
Appendix
Any updates to the Owner's Manual of the ve  This corresponds to pressing the re 
hicle are listed here. mote control button.
Hood
Correction to the Owner's
Manual
Opening from the outside
Opposite to the description in this Owner's The hood cannot be opened from the outside.
Manual, the following changes were imple 
Unlocking hood
mented after the editorial deadline:
The hood cannot be unlocked using the re 
Remote control mote control.
Press the button in the driver's floor
area to unlock the button.
Adjusting
Unlocking
The settings for hood and tailgate are not
available.
1 Unlocking
2 Locking
3 Unlock the tailgate
4 Panic mode
Tailgate
Unlock the tailgate
Press button on the remote control for
approx. 1 second to unlock the tail 
gate.
Depending on the settings, the doors are un 
locked as well.
Unlocking the tailgate separately in
the case of Comfort Access
Press button on tailgate's exterior.

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 209
Appendix Reference

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 210
Reference Everything from A to Z
Everything from A to Z
Index
A All around the center con  AUTO program, intensity 132
sole 16 Average fuel consumption 87
ABS, Antilock Brake Sys  All around the roofliner 17 Average speed 87
tem 107 All around the steering Axle loads, weights 207
ACC, Active Cruise Control wheel 14
with Stop & Go 110 All-season tires, refer to Win  B
Accelerator pedal posi  ter tires 177
tions 68 Alternating-code hand-held Backup charging 168
Accessories and parts 7 transmitter 136 Band-aids, refer to First aid
AC quick charging cable, see Ambient light 92 kit 197
Level 2 charging cable 162 Antifreeze, washer fluid 74 Bar for tow-starting/
Activated-charcoal filter 133 Antilock Brake System, towing 198
Active Cruise Control with ABS 107 Battery, 12 volt 194
Stop & Go, ACC 110 Anti-slip control, refer to Battery replacement, vehicle
Adjustments, seats/head re  DSC 107 battery 194
straints 53 Approved axle load 207 Battery replacement, vehicle
Adjustments, steering Ash tray 139 remote control 39
wheel 59 Assistance when driving Battery state indicator 77
Advance climate control, refer off 109 Battery, vehicle 194
to Stationary climate con  Assist system, refer to Intelli  Being pulled, referred to Tow 
trol 133 gent Safety 100 ing 197
After washing vehicle 201 AUTO intensity 132 Belts, safety belts 55
Airbags 93 Automatic car wash 200 BMW Assist 6
Airbags, indicator/warning Automatic climate con  BMW eDRIVE 31
light 94 trol 130 BMW Homepage 6
Air circulation, refer to Recir  Automatic cornering adjust  BMW i Driver's Guide App 6
culated-air mode 129, 132 ment 57 BMW Internet page 6
Air conditioner 128 Automatic Cruise Control BMW maintenance sys 
Air, dehumidifying, refer to with Stop & Go 110 tem 188
Cooling function 129, 131 Automatic Curb Monitor 57 Body work, see Working on
Air distribution, Automatic deactivation, front- the vehicle 34
manual 129, 131 seat passenger airbags 95 Brake assistant 107
Air flow, air conditioner 130 Automatic deactivation of the Brake discs, break-in 148
Air flow, automatic climate high-voltage system 34 Brake pads, break-in 148
control 133 Automatic headlight con  Braking, hints 150
Air pressure, tires 173 trol 91 Breakdown assistance 196
Air vents, refer to Ventila  Automatic locking 48 Break-in 148
tion 133 Automatic recirculated-air Brightness of Control Dis 
Alarm system 49 control 132 play 89
Alarm, unintentional 50 AUTO program, automatic cli  Bulb replacement 190
mate control 131 Bulb replacement, front 191

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 211
Everything from A to Z Reference
Bulb replacement, tail Changing wheels/tires 176 Comfort Access 46
lights 193 Charging battery, see Vehicle COMFORT program, Dy 
Bulbs and lamps 190 charging 160 namic Driving Control 108
Button, RES 113 Charging, refer to Charging Compartments in the
Button, Start/Stop 64 vehicle 160 doors 145
Bypassing, refer to Jump- Charging, refer to Vehicle Compass 137
starting 197 charging 160 Compressor 178
Charging screen 76 Computer, refer to On-board
C Charging state indicator, computer 86
high-voltage battery 77 Condensation on win 
California Proposition 65 Charging status, see display dows 129, 132
Warning 8 of the charging status 164 Condensation under the vehi 
Camera-based Cruise Con  Charging vehicle 160 cle 151
trol 110 Charging vehicle, refer to Ve  Condition Based Service
Camera lenses, care 203 hicle charging 160 CBS 188
Camera, rearview cam  Chassis number, see vehicle Confirmation signal 48
era 121 identification number 10 ConnectedDrive 6
Car battery 194 Check Control 78 ConnectedDrive Services 6
Car care products 201 Check engine oil 184 Connecting electrical devi 
Care, displays 203 Check oil level 184 ces 139
Care, vehicle 201 Children, seating position 60 Contact with water, high-volt 
Cargo 152 Children, transporting age system 34
Cargo area 141 safely 60 Control Display 18
Cargo area, enlarging 141 Child restraint fixing sys  Control Display, settings 88
Cargo area, storage compart  tem 60 Controller 18
ments 145 Child restraint fixing system Control systems, driving sta 
Cargo cover 141 LATCH 61 bility 107
Cargo, securing 153 Child restraint fixing systems, Convenient opening with the
Cargo straps, securing mounting 60 remote control 41
cargo 153 Child seat, mounting 60 Coolant 186
Car key, refer to Remote con  Child seats 60 Coolant temperature 82
trol 38 Chrome parts, care 202 Cooling function 129, 131
Carpet, care 203 Cigarette lighter 139 Cooling, maximum 132
Car wash 200 Cleaning displays 203 Cooling system 186
Catalytic converter, refer to Climate control 128, 130 Corrosion on brake discs 151
Hot exhaust system 149 Clock 83 Cosmetic mirror 139
CBS Condition Based Serv  Closing/opening via door Courtesy lamps during un 
ice 188 lock 43 locking 41
Center armrest 143 Closing/opening with remote Courtesy lamps with the vehi 
Center console 16 control 41 cle locked 42
Central locking system 44 Clothes hooks 145 Cruise control 116
Central screen, refer to Con  Coasting 69 Cruise control, active with
trol Display 18 Combination reel, refer to Stop & Go 110
Changes, technical, refer to Turn signals 71 Cruise control, refer to Cam 
Safety 7 Combination switch, refer to era-based Cruise Con 
Changing wheels 194 Wiper system 72 trol 110

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 212
Reference Everything from A to Z
Cruising range 83 Drive readiness, switching EfficientDynamics 157
Current fuel consumption 87 off 67 Electric driving 68
Drive readiness, switching Electric driving, see BMW
D on 65 eDRIVE 32
Driving Dynamics Con  Electric range 83
Damage, tires 176 trol 108 Electronic Stability Program
Data, technical 206 Driving in detail 68 ESP, refer to DSC 107
Daytime running lights 91 Driving instructions, break- Emergency charging, refer to
Defrosting, refer to Windows, in 148 Backup charging 168
defrosting 129, 132 Driving instructions, eDRIVE Emergency detection, remote
Dehumidifying, air 129, 131 drive system 148 control 39
Deleting personal data 24 Driving mode 108 Emergency release, fuel filler
Deletion of personal data 24 Driving notes, general 149 flap 170
Departure times, stationary Driving, refer to drive readi  Emergency Request 196
climate control 134 ness in detail 65 Emergency start function, en 
Digital clock 83 Driving stability control sys  gine start 39
Digital compass 137 tems 107 Emergency unlocking, trans 
Dimensions 206 Driving, Start/Stop button 64 mission lock 67
Dimmable exterior mirrors 58 Driving style analysis 157 Energy Control 87
Dimmable interior rearview Driving tips 149 Energy recovery, display 
mirror 58 DSC Dynamic Stability Con  ing 77
Direction indicator, refer to trol 107 Energy recovery, driving sta 
Turn signals 71 DTC Dynamic Traction Con  bility control systems 107
Display for performance and trol 108 Engine coolant 186
energy recovery 77 Dynamic Stability Control Engine oil 184
Display lighting, refer to In  DSC 107 Engine oil, adding 185
strument lighting 91 Dynamic Traction Control Engine start during malfunc 
Displays 75 DTC 108 tion 39
Displays, cleaning 203 Engine start, jump-start 
Displays, eDRIVE system 76 E ing 197
Displays, high-voltage sys  Entering a car wash 200
tem 76 ECO PRO 155 Equipment, interior 135
Disposal, coolant 187 ECO PRO+ 155 Error displays, see Check
Disposal, vehicle battery 194 ECO PRO display 155 Control 78
Distance control, refer to ECO PRO driving mode 155 ESP Electronic Stability Pro 
PDC 118 ECO PRO driving style analy  gram, refer to DSC 107
Divided screen view, split sis 157 Exchanging wheels/tires 176
screen 23 ECO PRO mode 155 Exhaust system 149
Door lock 43 ECO PRO Tip - driving in  Exterior mirror, automatic
Door lock, refer to Remote struction 156 dimming feature 58
control 38 eDRIVE drive system, driving Exterior mirrors 57
Drive display 77 instructions 148 External start 197
Drive-off assistant 109 eDRIVE, electric driving, see External temperature dis 
Drive-off assistant, refer to BMW eDRIVE 32 play 82
DSC 107 eDrive system, at a glance 31 External temperature warn 
Drive readiness in detail 65 eDRIVE system, displays 76 ing 82

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 213
Everything from A to Z Reference
Eyes for securing cargo 153 FTM Flat Tire Monitor 99 Headlight courtesy delay fea 
Fuel 172 ture via remote control 42
F Fuel consumption, current 87 Headlight flasher 72
Fuel consumption, refer to Headlight glass 191
Failure message, see Check Average fuel consump  Headlights 191
Control 78 tion 87 Headlights, care 201
False alarm, refer to Uninten  Fuel filler flap 169 Head restraints 53
tional alarm 50 Fuel gauge, Range Ex  Head restraints, front 56
Fan, refer to Air tender 82 Head restraints, rear 56
flow 130, 133 Fuel lid 169 Heavy cargo, stowing 153
Fine wood, care 202 Fuel quality 172 Height, vehicle 206
First aid kit 197 Fuel recommendation 172 High beams 72
Fitting for towing, see Tow fit  Fuel, tank capacity 207 High beams, bulb replace 
ting 199 Fuse 194 ment 192
Flat tire, changing High-voltage battery, charg 
wheels 194 G ing state indicator 77
Flat Tire Monitor FTM 99 High-voltage battery, dis 
Flat tire, Tire Pressure Moni  Garage door opener, refer to charge 149
tor TPM 96 Universal Integrated Remote High-voltage battery,
Flat tire, warning lamp 97, 99 Control 135 heated 69
Flooding 150 Gasoline 172 High-voltage battery, heavily
Floor carpet, care 203 General driving notes 149 discharged 69
Floor mats, care 203 Glare shield 139 High-voltage system, auto 
Folding back rear seat back  Glass sunroof, powered 51 matic deactivation 34
rests 141 Glove compartment 143 High-voltage system, contact
Fold-out position, wiper 74 GPS location, vehicle posi  with water 34
Foot brake 150 tion 89 High-voltage system, dis 
Front airbags 93 Gross vehicle weight, ap  plays 76
Front armrest 143 proved 207 High-voltage system,
Front beverage holder, front safety 34
cup holder 144 H Hills 150
Front bottle holder, refer to Hill start assistant, refer to
Front cup holder 144 Halogen headlights, bulb re  Drive-off assistant 109
Front can holder, refer to placement 0 Hints 6
Front cup holder 144 Handbrake, refer to parking Hold function 71
Front cup holder 144 brake 70 Homepage 6
Front-end collision warning Hand-held transmitter, alter  Hood 44
with City Braking func  nating code 136 Hood via remote control 42
tion 101 Hazard warning flashers 196 Horn 14
Front holder for bever  Head airbags 93 Hot exhaust system 149
ages 144 Headlight control, auto  Hydroplaning 150
Front lights 191 matic 91
front-seat passenger airbags, Headlight courtesy delay fea  I
automatic deactivation 95 ture 90
Front-seat passenger airbags, Headlight courtesy delay fea  Ice warning, see External
indicator lamp 95 ture, remote control 48 temperature warning 82

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 214
Reference Everything from A to Z
Icy roads, see External tem  Interior lights during unlock  LED headlights, bulb replace 
perature warning 82 ing 41 ment 192
Identification marks, tires 174 Interior lights with the vehicle LEDs, light-emitting di 
Identification number, see ve  locked 42 odes 191
hicle identification num  Interior motion sensor 50 Length, vehicle 206
ber 10 Interior rearview mirror, auto  Letters and numbers, enter 
iDrive 18 matic dimming feature 58 ing 24
Ignition key, refer to Remote Interior rearview mirror, com  Level 1 Charging 165
control 38 pass 137 Level 1 charging cable 162
Illuminant replacement 190 Interior rearview mirror, man  Level 2 Charging 166
Important under the ually dimmable 58 Level 2 charging cable 162
hood 182 Internet page 6 Light alloy wheels, care 202
Increase range 154 Interval display, service re  Light-emitting diodes,
Increase range with Range quirements 83 LEDs 191
Extender 69 Interval mode 73 Lighter 139
Indication of a flat tire 97, 99 Lighting 90
Indicator and alarm lamps, J Lights 90
see Check Control 78 Light switch 90
Indicator lamp, see Check Jacking points for the vehicle Load 153
Control 78 jack 194 Loading 152
Individual air distribu  Jump-starting 197 Lock, door 43
tion 129, 131 Jump starting, refer to Locking/unlocking via door
Individual settings, refer to Backup charging 168 lock 43
Personal Profile 39 Locking/unlocking with re 
Inflation pressure, tires 173 K mote control 41
Inflation pressure warning Locking, automatic 48
FTM, tires 99 Key/remote control 38 Locking, settings 48
Info display, refer to On- Keyless Go, refer to Comfort Locking via tailgate 46
Board computer 86 Access 46 Longer idle phases 203
Initialize, Tire Pressure Moni  Key Memory, refer to Per  Long idle times and long-term
tor TPM 97 sonal Profile 39 vehicle storage 203
Initializing, Flat Tire Monitor Knee airbag 94 Long-term vehicle stor 
FTM 99 age 203
Instrument cluster 75 L Low beams 90
Instrument lighting 91
Integrated key 38 Lamp replacement, front 191 M
Integrated Owner's Manual in Lamp replacement, see Bulb
the vehicle 29 replacement 190 Maintaining charging state,
Intelligent Emergency Re  Language on Control Dis  refer to Range Extender 69
quest 196 play 88 Maintenance 188
Intelligent Safety 100 Lashing eyes, securing Maintenance require 
Intensity, AUTO pro  cargo 153 ments 188
gram 132 LATCH child restraint sys  Maintenance, service require 
Interior equipment 135 tem 61 ments 83
Interior lights 91 Leather, care 201 Maintenance system,
BMW 188

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 215
Everything from A to Z Reference
Make-up mirror 139 Mounting of child restraint Optional equipment, standard
Malfunction displays, see systems 60 equipment 6
Check Control 78 Multifunction steering wheel, Outside air, refer to Auto 
Manual air distribu  buttons 14 matic recirculated-air con 
tion 129, 131 Multimedia 6 trol 132
Manual air flow 130, 133 Overheating of engine, refer
Manual operation, door N to Coolant temperature 82
lock 43
Manual operation, exterior Navigation 6 P
mirrors 57 Neck restraints, front, refer to
Manual operation, fuel filler Head restraints 56 Paint, vehicle 201
flap 170 Neck restraints, rear, refer to Parallel parking assistant 123
Manual operation, Park Dis  Head restraints 56 Park Distance Control
tance Control PDC 119 Neutral cleaner, see wheel PDC 118
Manual operation, rearview cleaner 202 Parked car ventilation, refer to
camera 121 New wheels and tires 176 Stationary climate con 
Marking on approved Nylon rope for tow-starting/ trol 133
tires 177 towing 198 Parked vehicle, condensa 
Master key, refer to Remote tion 151
control 38 O Parking aid, refer to PDC 118
Maximum cooling 132 Parking assistant 123
Maximum speed, display 84 OBD Onboard Diagnosis 189 Parking brake 70
Maximum speed, winter OBD, see OBD Onboard Di  Parking lights 90
tires 177 agnosis 189 Parts and accessories 7
Measure, units of 89 Obstacle marking, rearview Passenger side mirror, tilting
Medical kit 197 camera 122 downward 57
Menu, EfficientDynamics 157 Octane rating, refer to Rec  Pathway lines, rearview cam 
Menu in instrument clus  ommended fuel grade 172 era 122
ter 85 Odometer 82 PDC Park Distance Con 
Menus, operating, iDrive 18 Office 6 trol 118
Menus, refer to iDrive operat  Oil 184 Pedestrian warning with city
ing concept 19 Oil, adding 185 braking function 104
Messages, see Check Con  Oil change interval, service Performance display 77
trol 78 requirements 83 Personal Profile 39
Microfilter 130, 133 Old batteries, disposal 194 Personal Profile, exporting
Minimum tread, tires 176 On-board computer 86 profiles 40
Mirrors 57 Onboard monitor, refer to Pinch protection system,
Mobile communication devi  Control Display 18 glass sunroof 52
ces in the vehicle 150 Opening/closing via door Pinch protection system, win 
Mobility System 178 lock 43 dows 51
Modifications, technical, refer Opening and closing 38 Plastic, care 202
to Safety 7 Opening and closing, without Power failure 194
Moisture in headlight 191 remote control 43 Power sunroof, glass 51
Monitor, refer to Control Dis  Opening and closing, with re  Power windows 50
play 18 mote control 41 Pressure, tire air pres 
Operating concept, iDrive 18 sure 173

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 216
Reference Everything from A to Z
Pressure warning FTM, Rear window de  Safety belt reminder for driv 
tires 99 froster 129, 132 er's seat and front passen 
Profile, refer to Personal Pro  Recirculated-air filter 133 ger seat 55
file 39 Recirculated-air Safety belts 55
Programmable memory but  mode 129, 132 Safety belts, care 202
tons, iDrive 23 Recommended fuel Safety of the high-voltage
Protective function, glass grade 172 system 34
sunroof 52 Recommended tire Safety systems, airbags 93
Protective function, win  brands 177 Screen, refer to Control Dis 
dows 51 Refueling 169 play 18
Pulling, refer to Towing 197 Remaining range 83 Screw thread, see screw
Push-and-turn switch, refer to Remote control/key 38 thread for tow fitting, screw
Controller 18 Remote control, malfunc  thread for tow fitting 199
tion 43 Sealant 178
Q Remote control, univer  Seat belts, refer to Safety
sal 135 belts 55
Quick charging cable, see Replacement fuse 194 Seat heating, front 54
Level 2 charging cable 162 Replacing wheels/tires 176 Seating position for chil 
Quick charging, see Level 2 Reporting safety defects 10 dren 60
Charging 166 RES button 113 Seats 53
RES button, see Camera- Secondary lights, rear 193
R based cruise control, Selection list in instrument
ACC 110 cluster 85
Radiator fluid 186 RES button, see Cruise con  Sensors, care 203
Radio 6 trol 116 Service and warranty 8
Radio-operated key, refer to Reserve warning, refer to Service requirements, Condi 
Remote control 38 Range 83 tion Based Service
Rain sensor 73 Reset, Tire Pressure Monitor CBS 188
Range Extender, fuel TPM 97 Service requirements, dis 
gauge 82 Retaining straps, securing play 83
Range Extender, increasing cargo 153 Services, ConnectedDrive 6
range 69 Retreaded tires 177 SET button, see CameraRange Extender, mainte  Roadside parking lights 91 based cruise control,
nance run 69 RON recommended fuel ACC 110
Rear beverage holder, rear grade 172 SET button, see Cruise con 
cup holder 145 Roofliner 17 trol 116
Rear bottle holder, refer to Rope for tow-starting/ Settings, locking/unlock 
Rear cup holder 145 towing 198 ing 48
Rear can holder, refer to Rear Rubber components, Settings, mirrors 57
Cup holder 145 care 202 Settings on Control Dis 
Rear cup holder 145 play 88
Rear holder for bever  S Side airbags 93
ages 145 Signaling, horn 14
Rearview camera 121 Safe braking 150 Signals when unlocking 48
Rearview mirror 57 Safety 7 Sitting safely 53
Size 206

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 217
Everything from A to Z Reference
Slide/tilt glass roof 51 Switch, refer to Cockpit 14 Towing 197
Smallest turning radius 206 Symbols 6 Tow lug, see Tow fitting 199
Snow chains 181 Symbols in the status field 22 TPM Tire Pressure Moni 
Socket 139 tor 96
Socket, OBD Onboard Diag  T Traction control 108
nostics 189 TRACTION, driving dynam 
SOS button 196 Tailgate closing 46 ics 108
Spare fuse 194 Tailgate opening 45 Transmission lock, electronic
Speed, average 87 Tailgate via remote con  unlocking 67
Speed limit detection, on- trol 42 Transporting children
board computer 87 Tail lights, bulb replace  safely 60
Speed limiter, display 84 ment 193 Tread, tires 175
Speed Limit Information 84 Tank unlocking, refer to Tank Trip computer 87
Speed warning 87 vent 169 Triple turn signal activa 
Split screen 23 Tank vent 169 tion 71
Stability control systems 107 Technical changes, refer to Trip odometer 82
Standard charging cable, see Safety 7 Turning circle lines, rearview
Level 1 charging cable 162 Technical data 206 camera 122
Standard charging, see Level Telephone 6 Turning radius 206
1 Charging 165 Temperature, air condi  Turn signal, bulb replace 
Standing air conditioning, re  tioner 129 ment 192
mote control 48 Temperature, automatic cli  Turn signals, operation 71
Start/Stop button 64 mate control 131
Start function during malfunc  Temperature display for ex  U
tion 39 ternal temperature 82
Stationary climate con  Text message, supplemen  Unintentional alarm 50
trol 133 tary 81 Units of measure 89
Status control display, Theft alarm system, refer to Universal remote control 135
tires 97 Alarm system 49 Unlocking/locking via door
Status information, iDrive 22 Tilt alarm sensor 49 lock 43
Status of Owner's Manual 7 Tire damage 176 Unlocking/locking with re 
Steering wheel, adjusting 59 Tire identification marks 174 mote control 41
Storage compartments 143 Tire inflation pressure 173 Unlocking, settings 48
Storage compartments, loca  Tire inflation pressure moni  Updates made after the edito 
tions 143 tor, refer to FTM 99 rial deadline 7
Storage, tires 177 Tire Pressure Monitor Upholstery care 202
Storing the vehicle 203 TPM 96 USB interface 140
Summer tires, tread 175 Tires, changing 176
Sun visor 139 Tire sealant 178 V
Supplementary text mes  Tires, everything on wheels
sage 81 and tires 173 Vanity mirror 139
Switch for Dynamic Driv  Tire tread 175 Vehicle battery 194
ing 108 Tone 6 Vehicle battery, replac 
Switching on, drive readi  Total vehicle weight 207 ing 194
ness 65 Touchpad 21 Vehicle, break-in 148
Switch off, drive readiness 67 Tow fitting 199 Vehicle care 201

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Seite 218
Reference Everything from A to Z
Vehicle features and op  Wheels, Flat Tire Monitor
tions 6 FTM 99
Vehicle identification num  Wheels, Tire Pressure Moni 
ber 10 tor TPM 96
Vehicle jack 194 Width, vehicle 206
Vehicle paint 201 Window defroster,
Vehicle position, GPS loca  rear 129, 132
tion 89 Windows, powered 50
Vehicle wash 200 Windshield washer fluid 74
Ventilation 133 Windshield washer noz 
Venting, refer to Stationary zles 73
climate control 133 Windshield washer sys 
VIN, see vehicle identification tem 72
number 10 Windshield wiper 72
Voice activation system 26 Winter storage, care 203
Winter tires, suitable
W tires 177
Winter tires, tread 175
Warning and indicator lamps, Wiper 72
see Check Control 78 Wiper blades, replacing 190
Warning displays, see Check Wiper fluid 74
Control 78 Wiper, fold-out position 74
Warning messages, see Wiper system 72
Check Control 78 Wood, care 202
Warning triangle 197 Word match concept, naviga 
Warranty 7 tion 25
Washer fluid 74 Working on the body, see
Washer nozzles, wind  Working on the vehicle 34
shield 73 Working on the high-voltage
Washer system 72 system, see Working on the
Washing, vehicle 200 vehicle 34
Water, high-voltage sys  Working under the hood 182
tem 34
Water on roads 150
Weights 207
Welcome lamps during un 
locking 41
Welcome lights 90
What to do after an acci 
dent 199
Wheelbase, vehicle 206
Wheel cleaner 202
Wheels, changing 176
Wheels, everything on wheels
and tires 173

Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

eu

*BL296086500O*
Online Edition for Part no. 01 40 2 960 865 - II/15
Downloaded from www.Manualslib.com manuals search engine

Other ManualsLib Projects
www.manualslib.com
www.manualslib.de
www.manualslib.es
www.manualslib.fr
www.manualslib.nl
www.manualslib.mx
www.manualslib.tech 30+ Languages