Electric vehicles can offer several benefts, including improved fuel economy,
lower fuel costs, and reduced emissions. Photo by Erik Nelsen, NREL 64276.
At a Glance: Electric Vehicles
Electric vehicles (EVs) All-electric vehicles are propelled by one
or more electric motors powered by energy
include all-electric
stored in batteries. This makes BEVs very
vehicles—also referred to low maintenance, which saves on costs.
as battery electric vehicles
PHEVs use batteries to power an electric
(BEVs)—and plug-in hybrid motor and use another fuel, such as gasoline,
electric vehicles (PHEVs). to power a conventional engine.
PHEVs produce fewer emissions than
About the Vehicles conventional vehicles because of their
increased fuel economy, and in all-electric
Why consider one? mode produce no tailpipe emissions, just like
all-electric vehicles.
EVs cost less to operate, so the higher initial
vehicle cost can be offset over the lifetime
EVs provide instant torque, resulting in a
of the vehicle. That’s because electric
fun, fast, and quiet driver experience!
drivetrains are very efficient, and electricity
is much cheaper than gasoline or diesel fuel.
What vehicles are available and how
Because they use little or no gas, these much do they cost?
vehicles minimize or even eliminate trips to Manufacturers’ suggested retail prices
the gas station. Most drivers find that they (MSRPs) start at about $28,000 for all-
can primarily charge at home or at work. electric vehicles.
1

Did You Know?
Electricity is much cheaper than gasoline or diesel fuel, costing about $6 to
drive 200 miles at a nationwide average, when accounting for vehicle
effciency.
EVs are about three times more effcient than conventional vehicles,
earning these vehicles top spots on FuelEconomy.gov’s list of most effcient
vehicles (fueleconomy.gov/feg/topten.jsp).
Regenerative braking allows EVs to capture energy normally lost during
braking by using the electric motor as a generator and storing that captured
energy in the battery.
Most currently available electric vehicles have ranges between 110 and
over 300 miles. Larger batteries and growing access to charging are
increasingly addressing “range anxiety,” or the fear of running out of charge.
A federal tax credit of $3,750–$7,500 There are more than 140,000 public charging
may be available for some EV purchases. outlets across the country, including a
Depending on your location, you may growing number of “DC fast charge” units
also be eligible for incentives from your that enable rapid charging. To locate stations,
state or utility. Find relevant incentives use the Alternative Fueling Station Locator
by searching the Alternative Fuels Data (afdc.energy.gov/stations) or download the
Center’s (AFDC’s) Federal and State Laws Android or iPhone app.
and Incentives database (afdc.energy.gov/
afdc/laws).
Search and compare dozens of models
from all major manufacturers at
FuelEconomy.gov.
Charging Batteries
Where can I charge?
Most EVs come with a 110-volt “Level 1”
cordset that can be plugged in to a typical
household outlet.
For quicker charging, homeowners can
install a 240-volt “Level 2” unit, often with
little or no required electrical upgrades
because most homes have 240-volt service
for appliances like dryers and electric ranges. This “Level 1” cordset can be
plugged in to a typical dedicated,
More and more workplaces are also
110-volt household outlet. Photos
installing charging units or making 110-volt
by Erik Nelsen, NREL 64271, inset
outlets available to employees and visitors.
64274.
2

Public charging stations typically include one or more “Level 2” units and may
include “DC fast charge” units as well. Photo by Dennis Schroeder, NREL 48757.
How long does it take to recharge? What about safety and maintenance?
“Level 1” charging units add 2–5 miles of EVs and their battery packs undergo the
range per hour of charging. same rigorous safety testing as conven-
tional vehicles sold in the United States and
“Level 2” charging units add 10–30 miles of must meet Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
range per hour of charging. Standards.
“DC fast” units can add 100–200+ miles of Because PHEVs have a conventional
range in as little as 30 minutes. engine, their maintenance requirements are
similar to those of conventional vehicles.
How far can I go on a charge?
BEVs have fewer maintenance require-
The distance an EV can travel on a single battery ments because they have fewer moving
charge is known as its “all-electric range.” parts and fluids to change, and their
electrical systems require minimal
All-electric vehicles can typically go between maintenance.
110 and over 300 miles on a single charge.
A manufacturer’s battery warranty typically
PHEVs can typically go 15–60 miles on battery covers 8 years/100,000 miles. Expected
power alone; their overall range is determined by battery lifetime is 12–15 years under
the fuel tank capacity because the engine kicks normal operating conditions. Check with
in when the battery is depleted. your vehicle’s manufacturer for vehicle and
battery warranty information.
Several factors affect actual range, including
driving conditions, driving habits, battery
size, and use of climate controls.
3

Options for Going Electric
Below are the key differences between BEVs and PHEVs:
All-electric vehicles can travel about 100 to 400 miles on a
single charge (depending on model and battery options).
They are powered by an electric motor that uses energy
BEV
stored in a battery (larger than the battery in a PHEV). EV
batteries are charged by plugging the vehicle in to an
electric power source and through regenerative braking.
A smaller battery allows PHEVs to travel on electricity
alone for up to 60 miles (depending on model). The
battery can be charged by plugging in to an electric
PHEV
power source, through regenerative braking, and by
the engine.
Unlike all-electric vehicles, PHEVs don’t have to be plugged in. They can be
fueled solely with gasoline, like a conventional vehicle. However, they will
not achieve maximum fuel economy or take full advantage of their electric
capabilities without plugging in.
Two types of electric-drive vehicles not covered here are hybrid electric
vehicles (which are powered by a conventional engine and an electric motor
that uses energy from the internal combustion engine as well as energy
stored in a battery) and fuel cell electric vehicles (which use a propulsion
system similar to electric vehicles, and energy stored as hydrogen is
converted to electricity by the fuel cell).
For more information, visit:
afdc.energy.gov
DOE/GO-102023-6049 • August 2023
4