Electric Vehicle
Basics
Electric vehicles (EVs) use electricity Electric vehicles are charged by plugging the vehicle into an electric power source.
as their primary fuel or to improve Photo courtesy of Forth.
the effciency of conventional vehicle
an electric power source and can also be
designs. EVs include all-electric
charged through regenerative braking. Regenerative Braking
vehicles, also referred to as battery
All-electric vehicles produce no tailpipe
electric vehicles (BEVs), and plug-in Regenerative braking allows EVs to
emissions, although there are "life cycle"
hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs). In emissions associated with the electricity capture energy normally lost during
colloquial references, these vehicles production. braking by using the electric motor
as a generator and storing that
are called electric cars, or simply EVs,
All-electric vehicles typically have
captured energy in the battery.
even though some of these vehicles
shorter driving ranges per charge than
still use liquid fuels in conjunction conventional vehicles have per tank of
with electricity. EVs are known for gasoline. Most new BEVs are designed Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehicles
to travel between 110 and over 300 miles
providing instant torque and a quiet PHEVs use batteries to power an electric
on a fully charged battery, depending
driver experience. motor and use another fuel, such as
on the model. For context, 90% of all
gasoline, to power a conventional engine.
U.S. household trips cover less than 100
Other types of electric-drive vehicles The batteries are typically charged by
miles.1 An all-electric vehicle's range
not covered here include hybrid plugging the PHEV into an electric power
varies according to driving conditions and
electric vehicles, which are powered by source, although they can also be charged
driving habits. Extreme temperatures tend
by the conventional engine and through
a conventional engine and an electric to reduce range because energy from the
regenerative braking.
motor that uses energy stored in a battery powers climate control systems in
battery that is charged by regenerative addition to powering the motor. Speeding, PHEVs have an all-electric driving range
aggressive driving, and heavy loads can of about 15 to 60+ miles, depending
braking, not by plugging in, and fuel
also reduce range. on the model. As long as the battery is
cell electric vehicles, which use a
propulsion system similar to electric
vehicles, where energy stored as EVs at a Glance
hydrogen is converted to electricity by
EVs run on electricity alone. They are powered by one or more
the fuel cell. electric motors and a battery. The battery is charged by plugging
the vehicle into an electric power source and through
All-Electric Vehicles
regenerative braking.
All-electric vehicles do not have
PHEVs can travel moderate distances on electricity alone.
conventional engines but are driven solely
The battery can be charged by plugging into an electric
by one or more electric motors powered
by energy stored in batteries. The batteries power source, through regenerative braking, and by
are charged by plugging the vehicle into the engine.
PHEVs don't have to be plugged in before driving. They can also be fueled solely
1 National Highway Travel Survey, U.S. Department
of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, with conventional fuel. However, they will not achieve maximum fuel economy or
2008, fhwa.dot.gov/policyinformation/pubs/pl08021/
take full advantage of their all-electric capabilities without plugging in.
fig4_5.cfm.

charged, a PHEV can draw most of its often be done with little or no required
power from electricity for typical daily electrical upgrades, as most homes
driving. The engine will then power on have 240-V service for appliances like
when the battery is mostly depleted, dryers and electric ranges. A Level 2
during rapid acceleration, at high unit can be portable or "hard wired"
speeds, or when intensive heating or air into a building and can be purchased for
conditioning is required. as little as $200. For more information
on installing charging equipment, see
When running on battery power alone,
Charging Infrastructure Procurement and
PHEVs produce no tailpipe emissions.
Installation on the AFDC (afdc.energy.
Even when the conventional engine is
gov/fuels/electricity_infrastructure_
running, PHEVs typically consume less More heavy-duty vehicle manufacturers
development.html).
gasoline and produce fewer emissions are now offering plug-in models for
than similar conventional vehicles. feets. Photo by Dennis Schroeder, NREL To make long-distance travel more
46574. accessible, the Federal Highway
What EV Models Are Administration is establishing a network
How Do These Vehicles of alternative fueling and charging
Available?
infrastructure along highway corridors.
"Fuel Up"?
Nearly all major vehicle manufacturers Designated EV corridors2 supported
have EV models available, and some Charging equipment provides electricity by DC fast charging stations are under
have committed to transitioning to selling to charge EV batteries. The charging unit development nationwide. To find public
only EVs by 2030. communicates with the vehicle to ensure stations, use the Alternative Fueling
that it supplies an appropriate and safe
Station Locator (afdc.energy.gov/
Medium- and heavy-duty options are flow of electricity.
stations), which is available as an iPhone
also available for fleet applications. See
and Android app.
Considering an EV for fleet-specific There are more than 140,000 publicly
considerations. available charging outlets--and
Equipment Types and Costs
counting--across the country. Most
For up-to-date information on available currently available light-duty BEVs have Charging units are classified according
models, use the Alternative Fuels Data ranges between 110 and over 300 miles. to the rate at which they charge batteries.
Center (AFDC) Vehicle Search tool (afdc. Technological advances such as larger Two types--Level 1 and Level 2--
energy.gov/tools) or the Find a Car tool batteries and growing access to charging provide AC power to the vehicle, with the
on FuelEconomy.gov (fueleconomy.gov/ are increasingly addressing "range
feg/findacar.shtml). anxiety," or the fear of running out of
Charging Made Simple
charge. Learn more about trends in EV
charging infrastructure (afdc.energy.gov/ Most EV owners charge at home or
fuels/electricity_infrastructure_trends.
at work because charging is more
html).
convenient and cost-effective than
It may take as little as 30 minutes to fully using public stations. But public
charge an EV's battery, but charging equipment is also easy to use.
times vary based on the type or level of Depending on the station, drivers
charging; the type of battery, its capacity, might use a network card, credit
and how depleted it is; and the capacity
card, phone, cash, or even just enter
of the vehicle's internal charger (see
an account number. There are also
Charging Options table).
free chargers where users can just
Charging units can be installed in plug in.
residential, fleet, workplace, and
An added beneft of going electric is
public settings. Most EVs come with a
that electricity prices are less
110-volt "Level 1" cordset that can be
plugged into a typical electrical outlet. volatile than gasoline and diesel
For quicker charging, homeowners prices, so drivers can more easily
can install a 240-V "Level 2" unit on forecast their fueling expenses. See
Getting started with an EV is easy
a dedicated electrical circuit. This can a comparison of all fuel prices over
thanks to the charging "cordset" that
comes with most vehicles. Photo by time on the AFDC Fuel Prices page
Erik Nelsen, NREL 64277. 2 fhwa.dot.gov/environment/alternative_fuel_corridors (afdc.energy.gov/fuels/prices.html).

Charging Options
Federal and state tax credits and
Cost for Equipment, Installation,
Typical Charging Time private and utility rebates may also be
and Site Costs*
available to help offset the cost of EVs.
Level 1 2-5 miles of range per hour $0 to $1,800 For information on available vehicle
incentives, see the AFDC Laws &
of charging
Incentives page (afdc.energy.gov/laws).
Level 2** 10-30 miles of range per $800 to $33,000
To find fuel economy ratings and fuel/
hour of charging
vehicle cost comparisons among
DC Fast 100-200+ miles of range in $30,000 to over $120,000 currently available models, visit
Charging** 30 minutes FuelEconomy.gov.
*Costs do not include the price of operation (network charges, electricity, utility How Do Their Emissions
demand charges). Factors affecting the price include equipment (charging equipment, Compare With Those of
electrical supplies), electrical installation (upgrading or adding electrical service,
Conventional Vehicles?
upgrading the electrical panel, conduit, and trenching), site improvements (adding
pavement), activating a network, payment collection, labor, permitting, and taxes. EVs typically produce fewer emissions
than conventional vehicles. All-electric
**Charging unit cost (Level 2 and DCFC) is proportional to the unit's power rating. The
vehicles produce zero tailpipe emissions,
higher its rating, the higher the cost. A Level 2 unit can range from 6.6 to 19.2 kW
and PHEVs produce no tailpipe emissions
output. A DCFC unit can range from 25 to 350 kW. Charging varies by charging unit
when in electric-only mode.
power, vehicle, and battery state of charge.
Life cycle emissions are generated when
vehicle's onboard equipment converting How Much Do the fuel or electricity is produced, as well as
AC to DC to charge the batteries. The Vehicles Cost? during the manufacturing of the vehicle
other type--DC fast charging (DCFC)-- itself. The life cycle emissions of an EV
EVs are generally more expensive than
provides DC power directly. largely depend on how the electricity
their conventional counterparts. However,
is generated (and how much a PHEV's
Wireless or "inductive" charging lower fueling and maintenance costs can
engine is being used), and this varies by
equipment uses an electromagnetic field make them a competitive option. For
region. Generally, all-electric vehicles
to transfer electricity to an EV without example, electric drivetrains are more
and PHEVs produce one-third to half
a cord. Today, this technology is used efficient, making BEVs (and PHEVs
the emissions of conventional vehicles,
primarily at higher power levels in heavy- operating in electric mode) more than
respectively, considering both air
duty applications like transit buses. three times as efficient. Electricity is also
pollutants and greenhouse gases. Regions
less expensive than gasoline or diesel on
with high use of renewable energy will
Some states and utilities offer financial an energy-equivalent basis. BEV drivers
see stronger emissions benefits. See a
incentives for charging stations; see the can save as much as $14,500 in fuel costs
comparison of emissions by state using
AFDC Laws & Incentives page for more alone over 15 years (see table: Benefits
the AFDC emissions tool at afdc.energy.
information (afdc.energy.gov/laws). of Electric-Drive Vehicles).
gov/ev-emissions.html.
What About Safety and
Maintenance?
National Average Annual Emissions per Vehicle
All EVs undergo the same rigorous
safety testing as conventional vehicles
Electric emissions
All Electric sold in the United States and must meet
Gasoline emissions
Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards
(including those for batteries). For
Plug-in Hybrid
additional safety information, refer to
the AFDC's Maintenance and Safety of
Hybrid Hybrid and Plug-In Electric Vehicles
page (afdc.energy.gov/vehicles/electric_
maintenance.html).
Gasoline
Because PHEVs have conventional
0 3k 6k 9k 12k 15k engines, their maintenance requirements
Light-duty vehicles excluding fuel cell electric Pounds of CO 2 Equivalent are similar to conventional vehicles.
Based on assumptions updated in 2020

Bene ts of
  Evaluating equipment vendors and
Electric-Drive
considering needs/options such as
Vehicles compared smart charging, cloud communications,
PHEVs All-electric vehicles
to conventional vehicles vendor payment, and equipment ownership and maintenance
Fuel Economy Most achieve combined fuel Most achieve fuel economy ratings
economy ratings higher than higher than 100 mpge.*
  Timing the purchase and installation
90 mpge.*
of charging units with the delivery
of vehicles (this can be especially
Emissions Produce no tailpipe emissions Produce no tailpipe slow/complicated for municipal
Reductions when in electric-only mode. emissions. organizations).
Generally, they produce less than Generally, they produce one-third
half the emissions. the emissions. For medium- and heavy-duty vehicles,
there are additional considerations:
Fuel Cost In electric-only mode, PHEV All-electric vehicles run on   Examining auxiliary loads (e.g.,
Savings** electricity costs range about electricity only. Electricity costs are
heating/cooling, lights, power take-off/
3 -10  per mile. 2 -6  per mile.
hydraulics use), and optional auxiliary
On gasoline only, fuel costs are
power units or heating, ventilating, and
about 4 -36  per mile.
air-conditioning (HVAC) units powered
by diesel or another fuel
Fueling Can fuel at gas stations. Can charge at:
Flexibility Can charge at:   home   Determining the impacts of increased
  home   public charging stations electricity consumption, especially
  public charging stations   some workplaces when several vehicles need to be
charged simultaneously at high
  some workplaces
charging rates
Electricity is produced from varied, domestic sources:   Understanding original equipment
manufacturer vehicle maintenance and
support if issues arise.
Sources: AFDC (afdc.energy.gov), FuelEconomy.gov
* EVs are rated not in miles per gallon (mpg) but miles per gallon of gasoline Find additional information on EVs on
equivalent (mpge). Similar to mpg, mpge represents the number of miles the vehicle the AFDC at afdc.energy.gov/vehicles/
can travel using a quantity of fuel (or electricity) with the same energy content as a electric.html.
gallon of gasoline.
**Compare to 10 -15  per mile for conventional gasoline- or diesel-powered sedans.
For all EVs, the electrical system (battery, Considering an EV
motor, and associated electronics)
Fleet managers should consider:
requires minimal scheduled maintenance.
A manufacturer's warranty of a battery   Arranging for basic technician and
typically covers 8 years or 100,000 driver training
miles, and the expected battery lifetime
is 12 to 15 years under normal operating   Conducting site planning for charging
conditions and in moderate climates. units, including setbacks, electrical
Check with your manufacturer about service locations, potential service
vehicle and battery warranties. Brake upgrade needs, and future upgrades
systems on these vehicles typically
  Determining when and how the
last longer than conventional vehicles
vehicles will charge (including working
because regenerative braking reduces
with utilities to understand time-ofbrake wear.
use and demand charges), as well as
All-electric vehicles lack conventional managed charging
engines and have far fewer moving
  Exploring private or utility incentives For more information, visit:
parts and fewer fluids to change, so they
for equipment installation or power use afdc.energy.gov
typically require less maintenance than
conventional vehicles or even PHEVs. DOE/GO-102023-6050   August 2023