Renault Zoe
A. Starting and Driving the Car
1. Ensure the car is disconnected from the charging points, and the charging cable is
back in the boot. See section 3 below on using the charger.
2. With your foot on the brake pedal, press the start button, found to the left hand side
of the steering wheel.
3. The dashboard will light up and a ready sign should be present.
4. Keep your right foot on the brake pedal and select Drive on the gear selector by
pulling the gear knob down and towards you
5. Release the handbrake and you are ready to drive off
6. As with many electric cars, the Zoe is automatic, so the car will 'creep' forward as
soon as you take your foot off the foot brake
7. Use only your right foot to control the accelerator and brake pedals
B. Parking and leaving the car
1. Depress the footbrake and select Parking on the gear selector.
2. Ensure that the handbrake is also on
3. Press the start/stop button found on the left hand side of the steering wheel
4. Put the car on charge (see section below) Co-wheels smart card as usual.
C. Using charge posts
1. The Zoe has a specific charging lead, which is kept in the
boot of the car.
2. The Zoe is part of the Charge Your Car scheme which
provides a network of charging posts. The Charge Your Car
(CYC) card is found in the on-board computer, where you
would find the fuel card in a petrol car.
3. Hold the CYC card against the reader on the charging post.
The screen on the post will acknowledge the card, and
become operational.
4. There is a small button on the right had side of the steering
wheel, with a picture of a charging plug on it. This opens
the charging port on the bonnet of the car
5. Plug the charging lead into the car - the charging port is in the bonnet. Make sure it
is firmly in place
6. Plug the charging lead into the socket on the charging post again making sure the
lead is firmly in place

7. The screen on the charging post will take several seconds to confirm that the
connection is secure and will also confirm that charge is being delivered to the Zoe
8. Rapid Charge Units. These units (often found at motorway service stations) have
their own charge leads and will have one that fits the Zoe. Follow the instructions on
the unit but select AC charge when doing so.
Ending charging the car
1. Hold the CYC card against the reader on the charging post. This will end the charging
cycle.
2. Remove the charging cable from the post and the charging port in the bonnet of the
Zoe. Note: to release the cable from the car you will need to press the button in the
car that opens the charge port as it also acts as a cable release.
3. Replace the charging lead into the boot of the car, and ensure the charging post and
car charging port flaps are both closed.
Key Vehicle Information
maximum range 75 miles
top speed 84 mph
optimum performance urban, stop starting driving
Important Information
  The Zoe should only be recharged on approved recharging infrastructure, installed
and checked by an approved supplier. The Zoe should not be plugged into a
domestic supply with a 3 pin socket.
  You should plan for your first few journeys to be no more than 60 miles, to get
accustomed to the cars